---
layout: article
title: Over 800 scientists Stand against Language critical of Evolution
date: '2009-01-23 23:32:14 -0700'
author: PvM
mt_id: 4118
blog_id: 2
post_id: 4118
basename: over_800_scient
---
At the [Christian Today](http://au.christiantoday.com/article/over-800-scientists-stand-against-language-critical-of-evolution/4438.htm) website we learn how the Creationist in Texas have been defeated, although they did manage to get some amendments approved which undoubtably will be abused by some.

The scientists, apparently familiar with the Discovery Institute's desperate attempts after the Dover failure, observed that

> Over 800 scientists in Texas have signed a statement to "encourage valid critical thinking and scientific reasoning by leaving out all references to 'strengths and weaknesses'" of evolution - references, they say, that politicians "have used to introduce supernatural explanations into science courses."

Our friends at the [NCSE](http://ncseweb.org/news/2009/01/weaknesses-removed-from-texas-science-standards-004231) reports

> Unfortunately, the Board took a sizable step backward, says Dr. Scott. Last-minute amendments to the Earth and Space Science standards and the Biology standards could allow creationists to smuggle their views back into the classroom.

The New York Times [reports](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/24/education/24texas.html?ref=us) how the amendments make no sense.

> The amendment "makes no sense to me," said David M. Hillis, a prominent professor of biology at the University of Texas, adding, "It's a clear indication that the chairman of the state school board doesn't understand the science."

Should we thus be surprised to find out that the Discover Institute is touting these last minute amendments?

Ignorance knows no bounds.

Check out who [signed](http://www.texasscientists.org/sign.html)
Present count:

588 Texas Science Faculty <br />
777 Other Texas Scientists

> Scientists for a Responsible Curriculum in
> Texas Public Schools
> 
> A strong science curriculum is an essential part of a 21st-century education and should be based on established peer-reviewed empirical research. In 2008-09 the State Board of Education is revising the Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) curriculum standards for the sciences.
> 
> Scientifically sound curriculum standards must:
> 
> 
> 
> * acknowledge that instruction on evolution is vital to understanding all the biological sciences;
> * make clear that evolution is an easily observable phenomenon that has been documented beyond any reasonable doubt;
> * be based on the latest, peer-reviewed scholarship;
> * encourage valid critical thinking and scientific reasoning by leaving out all references to "strengths and weaknesses," which politicians have used to introduce supernatural explanations into science courses; and
> * recognize that all students are best served when matters of faith are left to families and houses of worship.
> 
> 
> We, therefore, call on the Texas State Board of Education to approve science curriculum standards that prepare Texas students to succeed in the 21st century.
