---
title: 'Liberal creationism'
date: '2018-12-31 12:00:00 -07:00'
author: Jonathan Kane
---
Why science educators should oppose liberal creationism

# Part 1: What is Liberal Creationism?

For most of its lifespan, Panda's Thumb was exclusively a blog about the evidence for evolution and the problems with creationism. This has begun to change in recent years, with both PT and the National Center for Science Education starting to combat climate change denial as well. Taking on climate change denial was a sensible decision, both because of the long-term environmental impact of climate change and because of the Trump administration's apparent ignorance in this area, but evolution and climate change aren't the only areas where public ignorance of science is a problem.

With respect to both evolution and climate change, the people who reject the scientific consensus tend to be politically conservative, but conservatives do not have a monopoly on scientific ignorance. <a href="https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2952510">This meta-analysis of several studies</a> found that unwillingness to accept the validity of information that contradicts one's political beliefs is almost exactly as common among liberals as it is among conservatives. An <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0262407917308783">article discussing this study</a> in <i>New Scientist</i> mentions anti-vaccination attitudes and opposition to GMOs as two areas that anti-science viewpoints are more common on the left than on the right, using the city of Seattle as an example. Although Seattle is one of the most progressive and well-educated cities in the United States, it also has a lower childhood polio vaccination rate than Rwanda's.

Even when science educators have tried to address scientific ignorance on both sides of the political spectrum, there is one area that often is overlooked, which is commonly known as Liberal Creationism. But as I'll be explaining, this particular area of ignorance is harmful to society for similar reasons to why anti-vaccination attitudes, young-Earth creationism, or climate change denial is harmful.

<b>Liberal Creationism</b> is the rejection of findings and concepts from the psychological and biological sciences, because of fear of or discomfort about their political implications. This attitude exists for research about the biological basis for human instincts, about the genetic divergence of human populations, and (in particular) about the genetic basis of human personality and intelligence.

What I'm referring to as "Liberal Creationism" has been known by many other names over the years. In the 1980s, Bernard Davis coined the term "<a href="https://www.nationalaffairs.com/storage/app/uploads/public/58e/1a4/9b1/58e1a49b14ee0088424324.pdf">Neo-Lysenkoism</a>" for this set of viewpoints, in reference to Trofim Lysenko, the Soviet agriculturalist who spearheaded the rejection of genetics because of its political implications. A more recent term for this concept, coined by Steven Pinker, is "Blank-slatism". That term isn't an entirely accurate description, though, because very few advocates of this way of thinking believe that the mind is a blank slate in <i>every</i> respect. A <a href="https://www.gwern.net/docs/genetics/2014-horowitz.pdf">2014 study</a> by Horowitz, Yaworsky and Kickham found that social scientists' willingness to accept a biological explanation for various aspects of human behavior varied according to how well such a link aligned with their political beliefs. Biological explanations were most widely accepted when they were convenient for a liberal worldview, such as a biological basis for sexual orientation, and were least widely accepted when they were inconvenient, such as a biological basis for differences between male and female sexuality.

Recently, the term "Liberal Creationism" or "New Creationism" for this mindset has been growing in popularity. The term "New Creationism" was used for it by Jonathan Anomaly in <a href="https://www.jamesgmartin.center/2016/01/the-new-creationists/">this 2016 article</a>, and "Liberal Creationism" was the title of a lecture about it <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B3apK6LFxkU">presented in July 2017</a> at the International Society for Intelligence Research. These terms refer to the fact that like traditional young-Earth creationists, Liberal Creationists (a.k.a. Neo-Lysenkoists or Blank-slatists) reject certain findings because those findings are incompatible with their worldview. However, the term is accurate in another sense as well: with respect to both specific arguments and overall tactics, Liberal Creationists have lifted a large portion of their approach directly from the young-Earth creationist community. In this article’s next few sections, I'll be describing several examples of the close similarity between Liberal Creationism and young-Earth creationism.

Liberal Creationist attitudes have existed about many different aspects of psychology and genetics, but in recent years they've begun to cluster around one area in particular: anything to do with human races or human intelligence, <i>especially</i> in connection to one another. One event that demonstrates this trend, and one of my motivations for writing this article, was <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/protesters-at-middlebury-college-demonstrate-cultural-appropriation—of-fascism/2017/05/29/af2a3548-4241-11e7-9869-bac8b446820a_story.html">the demonstrations against Charles Murray</a> that occurred at Middlebury College last March. The relationship between race and intelligence is somewhat like the relationship between quantum mechanics and general relativity—there is a lot about this relationship that we legitimately don't know, and it is important to separate those aspects of the topic from the aspects where the scientific consensus is well-established. But in the latter areas, about which there has been no substantial dispute among geneticists or intelligence researchers for the past few decades, a lot of the popular arguments about race or intelligence have the same status in genetics or psychology that phlogiston and geocentrism have in physics.

# Part 2: Judging hypotheses by their moral implications

Despite the efforts by professional creation scientists to justify creationism scientifically, on the most basic level it is a doctrine that's held for religious reasons. Answers in Genesis concisely explains their position in their <a href="https://answersingenesis.org/about/faith/">statement of faith</a>:
<blockquote>By definition, no apparent, perceived or claimed evidence in any field, including history and chronology, can be valid if it contradicts the scriptural record. Of primary importance is the fact that evidence is always subject to interpretation by fallible people who do not possess all information.</blockquote>
When they are being honest about what they believe, most young-Earth creationists admit that they follow a similar principle. Kurt Wise explains this principle in the book <a href="http://creation.com/kurt-p-wise-geology-in-six-days"><i>In Six Days</i></a>:
<blockquote>Although there are scientific reasons for accepting a young earth, I am a young-age creationist because that is my understanding of the Scripture. As I shared with my professors years ago when I was in college, if all the evidence in the universe turns against creationism, I would be the first to admit it, but I would still be a creationist because that is what the Word of God seems to indicate.</blockquote>
Richard Dawkins <a href="https://scepsis.net/eng/articles/id_2.php">expressed astonishment</a> at Wise's statement: "We have it on the authority of a man who may well be creationism's most highly qualified and most intelligent scientist that no evidence, no matter how overwhelming, no matter how all-embracing, no matter how devastatingly convincing, can ever make any difference." But Dawkins might be surprised to know that religious people aren't the only ones arguing that certain ideas must be rejected if they conflict with one's worldview, regardless of what the evidence says, and that the exact same argument has been made by secular liberals.

## The source of the controversy

Before discussing Liberal Creationism in depth, first it's necessary to explain what it is that's being studied. The research at the core of the issue, and the underlying motivation for a large portion of Liberal Creationist arguments, concerns the observation that some racial and ethnic groups consistently average higher or lower than others on IQ and other standardized tests. Psychologists who study this topic are concerned primarily with investigating why these differences exist, what consequences they have for society, and what could possibly be done to reduce them.

Several books that discuss race and intelligence (such as <i>The Bell Curve</i> or <i>Race, Evolution and Behavior</i>) are infamous for the controversy they've generated, but there also is a large body of literature about this topic in professional psychology journals and textbooks that have never attracted any significant controversy. A lot of the data I'm going to present in this article comes from Earl Hunt's 2011 textbook <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=DwO4TtKAiCoC"><i>Human Intelligence</i></a>, which is described in <a href="http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-psych-120710-100353">this paper</a> as one of the best books available about human intelligence in general. The graph below shows the IQ score distribution of various ethnic groups from another uncontroversial source, which is the authoritative book on how to use and interpret the WAIS-IV IQ test.

Include image: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:WAIS-IV_FSIQ_Scores_by_Race_and_Ethnicity.png

Caption: Score distributions on the WAIS-IV IQ test of racial groups in the United States, according to <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=lszPs4JXxBYC">Weiss et al. 2010</a>. On this graph, the group labeled as "other" includes Native Americans, Alaskan Natives, and Pacific Islanders. Note that although their averages differ, the score ranges of all groups overlap a large amount. Also note that contrary to the popular perception that data about race and IQ favors white people over other groups, the group with the highest average score is Asian Americans. Chart by Victor Chmara on Wikimedia Commons; see <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:WAIS-IV_FSIQ_Scores_by_Race_and_Ethnicity.png">Wikimedia Commons</a> for a fuller description.

There isn't a simple graph like this one that shows the differences on other tests, but Earl Hunt's textbook presents this data on pages 407-436. Three other types of test that have similar gaps are the SAT, the National Assessment of Educational Progress, and both subjective and objective workplace performance evaluations. For gaps in the first two areas, Hunt cites the National Center for Education Statistics along with <a href="https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&amp;lr=&amp;id=Ywb7r1oOxJYC">this book</a>. For the job performance data he cites three meta-analyses: <a href="https://www.deviantart.com/users/outgoing?http://emilkirkegaard.dk/da/wp-content/uploads/ETHNIC-GROUP-DIFFERENCES-IN-COGNITIVE-ABILITY-IN-EMPLOYMENT-AND-EDUCATIONAL-SETTINGS-A-META%E2%80%90ANALYSIS.pdf">Roth et al. 2001</a>, <a href="http://people.tamu.edu/~w-arthur/611/Journals/Roth,%20Huffcutt,%20&amp;%20Bobko%20(2003)%20JAP.pdf">Roth et al. 2003</a>, and <a href="http://www.people.vcu.edu/~mamcdani/Publications/McKay%20&amp;%20McDaniel%20(2006).pdf">McKay and McDaniel 2006</a>. (It's important to cite literature reviews or meta-analyses when discussing this sort of data, because anyone can cherry-pick individual studies that support their opinion, whereas meta-analyses demonstrate the overall trend.) As I'll discuss in the next section, IQ is a strong predictor of both scholastic achievement and job performance, and Hunt calculates (pg. 410-421) that racial job performance gaps are approximately the size that would be predicted based on job performance's correlation with IQ.

Most of the data on this topic comes from the United States, Canada and Britain, but there is similar data from other countries. Citing four studies published 2000-2007, Hunt (pg. 412) mentions that racial IQ gaps (including the black/white gap, which is the most extensively studied of them) also exist in South Africa, Mexico, and southeastern Europe. These differences also exist when comparing average scores between nations, with the average test scores of Japan, China, Singapore, and South Korea being higher than those of European countries, which in turn are higher than those in Subsaharan Africa. Several psychologists have performed studies about international test score differences, but Hunt considers <a href="https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/c388/3079909e77a7b99777edfd325d17646b95c2.pdf">this one by Heiner Rindermann</a> to be the most robust. Rindermann's study looked at score differences in several types of international student assessment test, and found that national averages in these various tests are generally consistent both with another and with previously published estimates of national IQ averages.

A recent, non-controversial overview of international differences in intelligence is <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=HdWLCgAAQBAJ"><i>Hive Mind</i></a> by Garett Jones. Jones' book focuses on two main correlations with national IQ scores: countries with higher average IQs tend to be more wealthy, and they also tend to have more democratic governments. It is not easy to determine whether intelligence causes wealth and democracy or whether wealth and democracy cause intelligence, but Rindermann has examined this question in a <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160289607000207">second study</a>. This study found that when the cognitive abilities of a nation are raised, for example by improving its public schools, it produces gains in these measures of prosperity later on. This suggests that intelligence is increasing prosperity, rather than the reverse. (As a country becomes wealthier it can afford to spend more on public education, so there is most likely a causal relationship in the opposite direction also.)

Among books and articles written for a popular audience, it's common to see statements that these test score gaps are known for certain to be caused entirely by environmental factors, or that it is <i>a priori</i> impossible for them to have a genetic component. (Two of the arguments for this position, that IQ is meaningless and that race is meaningless, will be discussed in the next two sections.) However, this degree of certainty generally isn't found in papers or textbooks from psychologists and other intelligence researchers who study the topic. Hunt's textbook provides this summary (pg. 435-436):
<blockquote>Nevertheless, the issue is complex, and oversimplifications do not help. There are group differences in intelligence, they are important, and there are both scientific and social reasons for trying to understand them. Plausible cases can be made for both genetic and environmental contributions to differences in intelligence. The evidence required to quantify the relative sizes of these contributions to group differences is lacking.</blockquote>
Stuart Ritchie's book <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=aO7rBQAAQBAJ"><i>Intelligence: All That Matters</i></a> (2015) gives this summary (pg. 107):
<blockquote>As you might expect, there is intense disagreement over this sort of research [<a href="https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&amp;lr=&amp;id=YdnK_PLtDVQC">Nisbett, 2010</a>]. [...] The answer to all these questions is, unfortunately, that we don't really know. The area is so toxic and scandal-prone that most researchers (and research-funders) give it a wide berth. This means that there's far less high-quality research in this area than in the other topics we've discussed (see <a href="https://humanvarietiesdotorg.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/hunt-carlson-2007.pdf">Hunt and Carlson, 2007</a>, for a good summary of the issues).</blockquote>
Heiner Rindermann has conducted a poll investigating researchers' views in this area, which was presented at the International Society for Intelligence Research in 2013, and published as a <a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4804158/">paper in the journal <i>Intelligence</i></a> three years later. Rindermann interviewed researchers who studied intelligence, those who had published in the journals <i>Intelligence</i> and <i>Cognitive Psychology</i>, and those who had published in several other journals if their papers related to the topic of intelligence. One of the poll's questions concerned their views on the cause of international test score differences. Although the specific results varied depending on which region of the world was being discussed, the factor that was rated overall most important was genetics, to which researchers responding to the poll attributed an average of 19.72% of the differences. This was followed by quality of education (14.69%), culture (13.71%), quantity of education (13.60%), health (7.32%), wealth (7.27%) and politics (5.56%). (Several other factors that got averages of less than 5% aren't mentioned here.)

<a href="http://emilkirkegaard.dk/en/wp-content/uploads/2013-survey-of-expert-opinion-on-intelligence.pdf">Rindermann's original poll</a>, as presented at ISIR in 2013, also included a question that was omitted from the eventual paper in <i>Intelligence</i>. This question concerned the interviewees' views on the cause of the test score gap between black and white Americans. Among those who responded 17% felt the gap had no genetic component, 42% felt that between 0 and 40% of the difference was due to genes, 18% felt that it was about 50% due to genes, 39% felt that it between 60 and 100% due to genes, and 5% felt that it was 100% due to genes. Based on the results of this poll, the summaries given by Hunt and Ritchie about the current state of research in this area seem to be accurate. Among scientists who have published research in this field, there is no consensus as to the size of the genetic component of group differences, if one exists.

## Foregone conclusions

It isn't my intention for this post to cover the debate over the cause of racial test score gaps, since adequately covering that topic would require this post to be several times longer than it is. What matters here is that among researchers who study this topic, the cause of racial test score gaps is treated as a scientific question to which we don't yet know the answer. Along with aforementioned paper by Hunt & Carlson, two other overviews of the topic that argue for this perspective are <a href="http://laplab.ucsd.edu/articles2/Lee2010.pdf">this paper</a> by James Lee, and <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Brian_Boutwell/publication/312500015_Human_Biological_and_Psychological_Diversity/links/5919d4cb4585159b1a4ba2a9/Human-Biological-and-Psychological-Diversity.pdf">this one</a> by Winegard et al. However, the general public usually hasn't shown the same tolerance towards research in this area. There have been several examples of this principle, but I'm going to focus on one in particular.

In 2009 Jason Richwine, then a graduate student at Harvard University, published a <a href="http://delong.typepad.com/pdf-1.pdf">doctoral thesis</a> arguing that the IQ gap in the United States between white Americans and Latin American immigrants was unlikely to close. He based this argument on several collections and databases of test scores for immigrant groups, which included information about how many generations they've been in the U.S. Richwine went on to argue that because of the relationship between a nation's average IQ and its prosperity, as well as the relationship between an individual's IQ and several life outcomes (discussed in the next section), any discussion about the costs and benefits of immigration policies must take research about race and IQ into account.

When Richwine's dissertation was first published in 2009, it did not cause any immediate controversy. The controversy over it began in 2013 when the Heritage Foundation, where Richwine now worked, published an <a href="http://www.heritage.org/immigration/report/the-fiscal-cost-unlawful-immigrants-and-amnesty-the-us-taxpayer">unrelated study</a> co-authored by Richwine about the economic costs of illegal immigration. (This study did not discuss IQ, or make any direct reference to Richwine's dissertation.) In the context of discussing the 2013 study, the <i>Washington Post</i> <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2013/05/08/heritage-study-co-author-opposed-letting-in-immigrants-with-low-iqs/?utm_term=.70bd58fef6d7">unearthed Richwine's dissertation</a> from four years earlier, and soon most other major newspapers were covering it as well. At Richwine's alma mater of Harvard, 23 student groups subsequently issued a <a href="http://www.thehkscitizen.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/Letter-to-the-HKS-community.pdf">joint statement</a> demanding that Richwine's ideas not be tolerated. In response to the public pressure, Richwine was forced to resign.

It's beyond the scope of this article to evaluate whether Richwine's conclusions were correct or incorrect. In general, I think it's a bad idea for scientific discussions about race and IQ to include policy suggestions, so it would've been wiser if Richwine had just presented his conclusions about IQ gaps and their economic consequences, and left it up to someone else to figure out whether and how those conclusions should affect immigration policy. But what I want to focus on is the contrast between the sorts of arguments used in Richwine's dissertation, and those that were used in response to it. Richwine's dissertation displays a sophisticated knowledge of testing methods and statistics, and if its conclusions were incorrect they deserved a carefully reasoned rebuttal, along the lines of Talk.Origins' responses to the creationist arguments from the RATE group. However, the student groups' collective response did not engage with Richwine's actual arguments at all. Instead, they argued that whether Richwine was correct or not was irrelevant:
<blockquote>Even if such claims had merit, the Kennedy School cannot ethically stand by this dissertation whose end result can only be furthering discrimination under the guise of academic discourse.</blockquote>
Several news sources objected to this conclusion, including <a href="https://www.bostonglobe.com/opinion/2013/05/22/the-censors-and-jason-richwine/vzONhoAvMDHKqzASR9Ew9N/story.html">The Boston Globe</a> and <a href="http://www.telegram.com/article/20130516/column01/105169867">The Telegram</a>. The Telegram offered a concise explanation of what the problem was:
<blockquote>So, according to these Harvard groups, even if the data was academically sound, it must be discredited because it could lead to an unpleasant outcome. Does anyone else find this statement deeply disturbing? Must the cherished tenet of unfettered academic exploration vanish when the issue deals with race?</blockquote>
This viewpoint—that certain hypotheses about race and intelligence must be rejected <i>a priori</i> on moral grounds, regardless of what the evidence says—does not come only from student groups. Some prominent academics have made this argument as well. One example is <a href="https://www.cato-unbound.org/2007/11/21/eric-turkheimer/race-iq">Eric Turkheimer</a>, a well-known behavioral geneticist who argued for the same principle in the context of James Watson's comments about race and intelligence in 2007:
<blockquote> Why don’t we accept racial stereotypes as reasonable hypotheses, okay to consider until they have been scientifically proven false? They are offensive precisely because they violate our intuition about the balance between innateness and self-determination of the moral and cultural qualities of human beings [...] <b>it is a matter of ethical principle</b> that individual and cultural accomplishment is not tied to the genes in the same way as the appearance of our hair. (Emphasis added.)</blockquote>
Turkheimer made a similar argument in a <a href="https://beta.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/philippe-rushton-professor-who-pushed-limits-with-race-studies-dead-at-68/article4901806/?ref=http://www.theglobeandmail.com&amp;page=all">2012 obituary</a> for J. Philippe Rushton, a British-Canadian psychologist who's best known for his theory that the r/K selection model applies to human ethnic groups, and for his research into the relationship between race and brain volume. Turkheimer wrote:
<blockquote>Rushton knew a great deal about human intelligence and he made his case by marshaling rational arguments based on empirical data. His knowledge and his empiricism earned him a legitimate place at the scientific table. He was no crank. Nevertheless, there is no escaping the fact that the case he made was literally racist, and in my view no appeal to empirical data can rescue his hypotheses from their dubious origins and destructive consequences.</blockquote>
As in Richwine's case, there isn't space in this article for a detailed discussion about the flaws or merits of Rushton's work. What I want to focus on is Turkheimer's attitude specifically. Turkheimer apparently thinks that Rushton's work was <i>scientifically</i> valid, but that no empirical arguments can rescue Rushton's conclusions from their ethical implications. This is basically the same principle described in the group statement about Richwine: that even when a hypothesis has scientific merit, if it is morally offensive we must still reject it.

There are many more examples of this attitude than can be listed here. <a href="https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10699-015-9421-3">This paper</a> by Nathan Cofnas describes several other cases where well-known academics have argued for this position: that certain hypotheses about human intelligence, especially in relation to race, must be rejected on ethical grounds regardless of whether the data supports them or not. Cofnas refers to this practice as "fact-value conflation"—failing to make a distinction between judgments about whether an action is morally right or wrong, and judgments about whether an idea is factually correct or incorrect. An older source criticizing this way of thinking is <a href="https://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v272/n5652/pdf/272390a0.pdf">this paper</a> by Bernard Davis published in <i>Nature</i>, which describes it as an example of the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moralistic_fallacy">moralistic fallacy</a>.

## Arguments from history and consequences

As far as I know, there are only two groups of people who explicitly argue that certain ideas must be rejected, regardless of what the evidence says, if they are incompatible with one's worldview. This argument has been made by young-Earth creationists, as quoted above from Kurt Wise and AiG's statement of faith, and it has also been made by advocates of Liberal Creationism, as quoted from the Harvard group statement and Eric Turkheimer. But in this area, the similarity between Liberal Creationism and young-Earth creationism runs far deeper than that.

When one looks more closely at the specific moral justifications young-Earth creationists have given for rejecting evolutionary science, and that Liberal Creationists have given for rejecting research about race and IQ, they revolve in a large part around a pair of nearly identical arguments from history and appeals to consequences. In the case of both evolution and race/IQ, the argument is that these concepts must be rejected because accepting them would undermine society's morals, and because in the early twentieth century they were misused to support eugenicist political doctrines. An example of a book that makes this argument against evolution is <a href="sHXEBAAAQBAJ"><i>The Darwin Effect</i></a> by Jerry Bergman, and an example of a book that makes it against IQ is <a href="WTtTiG4eda0C"><i>The Mismeasure of Man</i></a> by Stephen Jay Gould. (Incidentally, it was specifically <a href="https://www.nationalaffairs.com/storage/app/uploads/public/58e/1a4/9b1/58e1a49b14ee0088424324.pdf">in reference to <i>The Mismeasure of Man</i></a> that the term "Neo-Lysenkoism" was coined.)

With respect to evolution, the argument from consequences and history has been extensively addressed by science educators. The rebuttal is that policies such as eugenics require making a moral judgment about what is or isn't valuable (such as a judgment that it's worthwhile to control people's lives for the good of the gene pool), whereas evolution is simply describing reality, and thus it can't dictate what our morals are. This rebuttal also applies to the same argument about IQ. Intelligence is a measurable human trait like weight or height, and one can discuss it without making any judgments about what people deserve or what sort of society we want to live in. Society has a habit of thinking that people with low IQs are somehow to blame for their predicament, but that assumption is completely unnecessary, especially since we don't claim people are to blame for their situation if they were born with most other handicaps, such as blindness, autism, or cystic fibrosis.<sup><a name="1" href="#Pinker">1</a></sup>

The argument from consequences was one of William Jennings Bryan's major reasons for opposing evolution: that he considered it inextricably linked to the eugenics movement that was popular in the early 20th century. In the long term, Bryan's fears about evolution turned out to be unfounded—evolution only seemed inextricably linked to eugenics because at the time, most of the people studying it were people who favored eugenic policies. Today, the same argument is being made about research on race and IQ, based on the fact that this research is popular reading for white supremacists. But it is important to put this argument in its historical context alongside Bryan's objection to evolution, because there is a good chance it will eventually turn out to be unfounded for a similar reason. If a time comes when this research is being followed not only by white supremacists but by everyone else as well, any argument that it's somehow inherently linked to white supremacism will be a lot less convincing.

From a practical standpoint, the approach described by Turkheimer and the Harvard statement also has a more significant downside. Scientific discoveries often build upon one another in unpredictable ways, as a discovery from one field becomes the basis for a new line of research in an entirely different area. When one argues that a certain topic must not be studied, it is impossible to predict what long-term effects this decision may have. James Flynn made this point about research on race and IQ in a <a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/458146a.pdf">2009 letter</a> published in <i>Nature</i>:
<blockquote>As the philosopher John Stuart Mill points out, when you assert that a topic is not to be debated, you are foreclosing not some narrow statement of opinion on that topic, but the whole spiralling universe of discourse that it may inspire. Mill thought that only someone so self-deluded as to think his own judgement was infallible could wish to circumscribe an unpredictable future in this way.</blockquote>
Flynn made this argument in a theoretical context, but in the real world it is no longer just theoretical. As I'll be discussing later in the article, there are specific areas where society's hostility towards research in this area either has the potential to cause harm, or has caused it already. The most important reason is that whether society wants to study racial test score gaps or not, it has never been able to ignore <i>every</i> aspect of the topic. This ambivalence has led to a somewhat schizophrenic attitude—on one hand, society is aware of the gaps and wants to address them somehow, but on the other hand it does not want to do the necessary research to make sure its decisions in this area are fully informed.

One other downside of rejecting hypotheses for moral or religious reasons, that I'll also be discussing over the rest of this article, is that it typically leads to rejecting findings from a steadily widening range of fields, like a chain of dominoes toppling one another. In the case of young-Earth creationists, this principle can be seen in their rejection of the conclusion that  <a href="https://answersingenesis.org/human-evolution/lucy/did-lucy-walk-upright/">australopithecines walked upright</a> (because this suggests they were more than just apes), the conclusion that <a href="https://pandasthumb.org/archives/2016/11/creationist-class.html">some dinosaurs were feathered</a> (because this supports the idea that they are related to birds), or the conclusion that <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=mmdbBAAAQBAJ&pg=PA169#v=onepage&q&f=false">the Mesozoic Erathem contains fossilized dinosaur nest colonies</a> (because this suggests the Mesozoic Erathem was not deposited during a global flood). The same principle even applies in areas one might not expect, such as the book <a href="https://answersingenesis.org/answers/books/unwrapping-pharaohs/"><i>Unwrapping the Pharaohs</i></a>, which rejects the standard historical record of ancient Egypt because this record suggests that there wasn't a global flood around 2000 BC.

As pointed out in the above linked article about feathered dinosaurs, rejecting some of these ideas is not strictly <i>required</i> by the young-Earth creationist position, and there are a handful of YEC authors who accept the existence of feathered dinosaurs or fossilized dinosaur nests. But when a person is morally committed to a hypothesis being false, it usually is not enough to accept that conclusion as entirely a matter of faith, and most people who take this position about a hypothesis feel they must discredit every line of data that could be used to support it. And as I'll explain in the next two sections, the equivalent argument from Liberal Creationists—that some hypotheses about race and IQ must be <i>a priori</i> rejected, regardless of what the evidence says—has had a similar effect on many otherwise widely-accepted conclusions from psychology and genetics.

# Part 3: Repetition of discredited arguments

Many people who've debated against young-Earth creationists are familiar with the concept of a PRATT, which is an acronym for Point Refuted A Thousand Times. PRATTs are creationist claims that are widely-known to be false, and that in most cases were abandoned by the major creationist organizations decades ago, but to which the creationist community is too attached to stop using altogether. The excerpt at my book's website from chapter 2, which is listed along with the other excerpts <a href="http://wordorreason.com/excerpts/">here</a>, describes two well-known YEC PRATTs: the claim that human footprints exist in the same stratum as dinosaur tracks in the bed of the Paluxy river, and that Earth's rotation is slowing down at too fast a rate for the Earth to be billions of years old.

This tactic of repeating long-discredited claims is commonly used by Liberal Creationists too, especially with respect to the topic of IQ. Before discussing examples of this tactic, though, first it's necessary to establish what the scientific consensus in this area is.

## What is general intelligence?

When many people think of IQ tests, they imagine the imitation IQ tests that are available to take at various websites, but when I discuss IQ tests in this article I'm referring only to the real thing. On a professional IQ test, such as the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) or the Sanford-Binet, there are a series of subtests that measure various mental skills, such as mentally rotating a 3-dimensional object (which measures visuospatial ability), reading comprehension tests (which measure verbal intelligence), and listening to a sequence of numbers and then reciting it in reverse (which measures working memory). A person's overall IQ score is based on their aggregate performance on all of these various subtests.

Although each of these subtests is measuring a different skill, one of the most consistently replicated findings in quantitative psychology is that a person's scores on all of them will be positively correlated. (<a href="https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&amp;lr=&amp;id=jp9dt4_0_cIC">This book</a> provides an overview of the data in this area.) In other words, even though a mental rotation test might seem to have nothing in common with a reading comprehension test, a person who does well on one will tend to also have above-average performance on the other. Using the statistical technique of <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factor_analysis">factor analysis</a>, it is possible to determine the underlying factors that account for this network of correlations. This method produces a set of specific abilities that each affect small numbers of subtests, as well as a general factor that accounts for the correlation shared by them all. This general factor is known as general intelligence, or <i>g</i>.

As explained by <a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24168689">Kievit et al.</a>, it's unlikely that <i>g</i> has a specific location in the brain, or that it is synonymous with any single neurological variable such as neural density or nerve conduction velocity. Rather, it is most accurate to think of general intelligence as the brain's overall processing power. An analogy that Kievit uses for general intelligence is physical fitness: a person's overall fitness contributes to their ability to perform a wide variety of physical tasks, so there will be a positive correlation between a person's physical ability in one area (such as running speed) and in a different area (such as the amount of weight one can lift). But physical fitness cannot be isolated to a single variable or part of the body—it is a combination of many interrelated characteristics, such as lung capacity, energy efficiency, muscle strength, and so on.

In a colloquial context, "intelligence" can mean a lot of different things, but <i>general intelligence</i> has a precise mathematical definition and an established way of calculating it. Because the concept and meaning of general intelligence are so well-established in psychology, it's common for papers to simply use the word "intelligence" when the context indicates that they're referring to <i>g</i>. Another term that these papers sometimes use for <i>g</i> is "general cognitive ability", sometimes abbreviated as GCA. Four books that discuss the importance of general intelligence, and its central place in differential psychology, are Deary's <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=BU6PqaBYjeYC"><i>Intelligence: A Very Short Introduction</i></a> (2001), Hunt's <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=DwO4TtKAiCoC"><i>Human Intelligence</i></a> (2011), Ritchie's <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=aO7rBQAAQBAJ"><i>Intelligence: All that Matters</i></a> (2015), and Haier's <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=qtZsDQAAQBAJ"><i>The Neuroscience of Intelligence</i></a> (2016).

## The state of research about general intelligence

One of the reasons this model of intelligence is so widely accepted is because of its predictive validity. General intelligence (or <i>g</i>) is effective for predicting outcomes in several areas of life, and it's impossible to review all of them here, but three of the areas where this relationship has been consistently replicated are academic performance, job performance, and income. A large meta-analysis of studies about its relationship to academic performance can be found <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160289615001269">here</a>, a summary of several meta-analyses of its relationship to job performance can be found <a href="http://www.unc.edu/~nielsen/soci708/cdocs/Schmidt_Hunter_2004.pdf">here</a>, and one about its ability to predict income can be found <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160289606001127">here</a>. The last meta-analysis specifically examined longitudinal studies, showing that general intelligence measured early in life predicts income as an adult.

Two other areas that general intelligence predicts life outcomes, discussed in Michael Ashton's 2018 textbook <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=v9q1DQAAQBAJ&amp;pg=PA263#v=onepage&amp;q&amp;f=false"><i>Individual Differences and Personality</i></a>, are health and law-abidingness. According to Ashton's book, intelligence measured early in life correlates with a person's eventual lifespan, and people with higher intelligence also are less likely to commit crimes, even when socio-economic status is controlled for. According to <a href="http://www.riskliteracy.org/files/1414/8312/0711/2016_Cokely_et_al_Decision_Making_Skill_CamHandbook_Final_Pre-Print.pdf">Cokely et al. 2017</a>, the relationship between intelligence and lifespan exists because more intelligent people possess greater decision-making ability, which affects health choices such as not ignoring a heart attack. Ashton's textbook (pg. 266) suggests that decision-making skill may also affect a person's ability to judge that the potential payoff of crime isn't worth the risk, as well as that people with lower intelligence might turn to a life of crime because they are frustrated by their lower opportunities for success in the workplace.

In addition to its ability to predict life outcomes, general intelligence or <i>g</i> also has a second type of predictive validity: it is correlated with neurological variables that can be measured physically. <a href="http://www.larspenke.eu/pdfs/Deary_Penke_Johnson_2010_-_Neuroscience_of_intelligence_review.pdf">This 2010 literature review</a> published in <i>Nature Reviews: Neuroscience</i> discusses several of these, including neuronal efficiency, cortical thickness, and overall brain volume. These relationships are discussed in more detail by Richard Haier's 2016 book <i>The Neuroscience of Intelligence</i>, which also mentions (pg. 126-135) that variation in these aspects of brain structure is influenced by many of the same genes that affect general intelligence. One recently-discovered neurological measure, known as morphometric similarity, <a href="https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/05/09/135855">accounts for 40% of the variation</a> in general intelligence (as measured by IQ).

General intelligence is highly heritable, with genes accounting for around 41% of the variation in <i>g</i> among children, 55% among adolescents, and 66% to 80% in early adulthood.<sup><a name="2" href="#Xfactor">2</a></sup> This finding is listed in <a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4739500/">this paper</a> as one of the top ten most replicated findings in the field of behavioral Genetics. Beginning in 2011, genetic studies have begun to identify some of the specific genetic variants that account for this heritability. There are too many of these studies to list, but their findings have been summarized in <a href="https://www.nature.com/mp/journal/v20/n1/full/mp2014105a.html">this literature review</a> published in <i>Molecular Psychiatry</i>, another <i>Nature</i> sub-journal.

Since general intelligence is known to influence outcomes such as income and success in education, several genetic studies have directly examined the influence of genes on those variables. <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160289614000178">This study</a> found that at least 18% of variance in socio-economic status, and at least 21% of variance in years of education, can be accounted for by genes that also influence general intelligence. This study used a method called <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genome-wide_complex_trait_analysis">genome-wide complex trait analysis</a> (GCTA), which can establish a lower bound for the overall genetic contribution to variance in a trait, but cannot identify the specific genes involved. Using a second method known as <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genome-wide_association_study">genome-wide association study</a> (GWAS), <a href="http://www.nature.com/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/mp2016107a.html">another study</a> identified specific alleles that account for 15% of the variance in years of education, and also identified some of the ways that these alleles are expressed in fetal brain development. The literature review in <i>Molecular Psychiatry</i> summarizes these results this way:
<blockquote>To sum up: there are genetic causes of some of the educational and social class differences in the populations studied, and these overlap with the genetic causes of intelligence differences.</blockquote>
The thing it's most important to understand about the research I've cited in this section is how mainstream it is. Studies about the genetic influence on general intelligence, as well as the outcomes that it predicts, are commonly published in major journals such as <i>Science</i> and <i>Nature</i>. Two of the literature reviews that I've cited above (the one from 2010 and the one from 2015) were published in <i>Nature</i> journals as well. The topic also is presented this way in all of the major textbook about differential psychology published in the past decade or so, three of which I've cited here—Hunt's and Haier's, both published by Cambridge University Press; and Ashton's, published by Academic Press. To dispute the validity of these conclusions, what you really have to dispute is the process by which a scientific conclusion can become mainstream, which is a process that applies in equal capacity to differential psychology, evolution, and climate change.

## The Flynn Effect

The relationship of general intelligence to IQ scores is most similar to the relationship between an object's mass and its weight. The most refined and widely-used way to compare the mass of two objects is by weighing them both, but that method only works if both objects were weighed on the same planet. A weight of ten pounds on the moon does not mean the same thing as the same weight on Earth, and the same principle also applies to IQ if you compare IQ test performance between multiple generations. 

For most of the twentieth century, the average performance on IQ tests of all demographic groups was gradually rising by the equivalent of about 3 IQ points per decade. This phenomenon is known as the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flynn_effect">Flynn Effect</a>, after James Flynn, who extensively documented it in the 1980s. (It's possible that the trend has <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160289604000522?via%3Dihub">recently stopped</a>, but there is not yet a lot of data on this point.) The average IQ score is by definition 100, so as test performance has risen, makers of IQ tests have had to periodically re-norm their score scales to adjust for the Flynn Effect. The cause of the Flynn Effect is not known for certain, but everyone agrees that it is environmental, because the genetic component of IQ cannot change that quickly.

The most popular explanation for the Flynn Effect is that as education and technology have improved, people have become better at the sort of logical thinking that's required for IQ tests. These improvements are often cited as evidence that environmental influences on intelligence are much stronger than genetic studies would suggest, but this argument has an important limitation. A <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160289613000226">meta-analysis by Njenhuis and van der Flier</a> found that the size of the score gains on IQ subtests was inversely correlated with how strongly performance on those subtests is influenced by general intelligence. Steven Pinker makes a similar point about the Flynn Effect in <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=8-vYCwAAQBAJ"><i>The Better Angels of our Nature</i></a> (pg. 653):
<blockquote>A breakthrough in the mystery of the Flynn Effect was the realization that the increases are <i>not</i> gains in general intelligence. If they were, they would have lifted the scores on all the subtests, including vocabulary, math, and raw memory power, with a rate related to the degree each test correlates with <i>g</i>.</blockquote>
One other line of evidence for Pinker's conclusion comes from mental chronometry, an alternative method of measuring general intelligence based on the brain's speed of information processing. Mental chronometry scores show a <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160289603000606">significant correlation with IQ scores</a>, and overviews of this method of measuring intelligence can be found on pages 152-155 in Earl Hunt's book, pages 170-171 in Richard Haier's book, and pages 245-249 in Michael Ashton's book. While performance on IQ tests has risen due to the Flynn Effect, <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160289603000606">performance on Mental Chronometry tests has not.</a> In fact, there is a debate over whether performance on mental chronometry tests has stayed the same or whether it has <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Michael_Woodley_Of_Menie/publication/263012615_Is_there_a_dysgenic_secular_trend_towards_slowing_simple_reaction_time_Responding_to_a_quartet_of_critical_commentaries/links/0deec53adddb335600000000.pdf">actually declined</a>. On the other hand, if the Flynn Effect were an increase in general intelligence, one would expect it to have raised performance on IQ tests and mental chronometry tests at about the same rate.

The Flynn Effect is sometimes suggested as a cause as racial IQ gaps, the idea being that life for African-Americans in the present is similar to what life was like for white Americans in the 1960s. However, this explanation is not widely-accepted among intelligence researchers. The flaw in this idea is explained in the Njenhuis and van der Flier paper: while gains from the Flynn Effect tend to be smallest on those IQ subtests that are most strongly influenced by <i>g</i>, racial IQ gaps show the opposite trend, with the gaps being <a href="http://emilkirkegaard.dk/en/wp-content/uploads/Testing-Spearmans-hypotheses-using-a-bi-factor-model-with-WAIS-IVWMS-IV-standardization-data.pdf">largest on the most <i>g</i>-loaded subtests</a>.<sup><a name="3" href="#Spearman">3</a></sup> Thus, while they both affect overall IQ scores, looking more closely it appears that the Flynn Effect is impacting a completely different set of abilities from whatever is causing racial test score gaps. James Flynn himself also <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=Z_-ykOVpRccC&amp;pg=PA137&amp;lpg=PA137#v=onepage&amp;q&amp;f=false">has argued against</a> the causes of the Flynn Effect and of racial IQ gaps being the same, although in the same book he also argues that the Flynn Effect is indirect evidence for the existence of X-factors (See footnote 2), because the Flynn Effect can be considered a type of X-factor that operates between generations.

## The test bias question

One commonly-repeated claim about IQ tests is that they are racially biased and underestimate the true ability of minority test-takers. If that were the case, what would it look like? If IQ tests underestimate the ability of any group of people, they should consistently under-predict that group's performance on other tests or in the real-life areas where IQ predicts success, such as grades in school or job performance as an adult. In 1982, the National Academy of Sciences commissioned a panel of experts to investigate the question of bias in IQ and standardized tests. The <a href=" http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1745-3992.1982.tb00659.x/abstract ">resulting report</a> concluded,
<blockquote>The committee further concluded that ability tests predict equally well for <i>all</i> groups of test takers. Research evidence does not support the notion that tests systematically underpredict the performance of minority group members. There are certain important exceptions to this generalization. One cannot give a Spanish-speaking child an English-language test and expect the scores to mean the same as those of a native English speaker. But the research evidence does not support the frequent contention that tests are unfair because they underpredict the performance of certain subpopulations. In this sense, tests are not biased and can be called “fair.”</blockquote>
This result has been replicated numerous times over the past 30 years. The following are a few other sources that have examined the question of test bias and come to the same conclusion:
<ul><li><a href="http://www1.udel.edu/educ/gottfredson/reprints/1997mainstream.pdf"><i>Mainstream Science on Intelligence</i></a>, a collective statement signed by 52 psychologists and behavioral geneticists in response to the controversy surrounding <i>The Bell Curve</i> in the 1990s. (This article originally appeared in the <i>Wall Street Journal</i> in 1994, and an expanded version was published in the journal <i>Intelligence</i> in 1997.)</li>
<li><a href="http://www.michna.com/intelligence.htm">Intelligence: Knowns and Unknowns</a>, a collective statement from 1995 which represents the official position of the American Psychological Association. Like the "Mainstream Science" statement, this statement was written with the goal of providing an authoritative statement in the context of the debates over <i>The Bell Curve</i>, and the conclusions of the two statements are very similar, although they differ in which things they emphasize.</li>
<li><a href="http://emilkirkegaard.dk/en/wp-content/uploads/Bias-in-Mental-Testing-since-Bias-in-Mental-Testing.pdf">This literature review</a> from 1999. (This paper is a follow-up to a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bias_in_Mental_Testing">book from 1980</a>, which was one of the original sources to examine the question of test bias.)</li>
<li>Earl Hunt's <i>Human Intelligence</i> (2011), which discusses the question of test bias on pages 422-425. Hunt concludes that IQ tests are not culturally biased against African-Americans or Latin Americans, but he includes one caveat: there is not enough data to know for certain whether tests are biased against people of East Asian descent. Recall from the graph in the previous section that the average IQ scores of Asian Americans are higher than those of white Americans, and if IQ tests are biased against them, this would mean that IQ test <i>underestimate</i> their true ability. (This possibility is also mentioned in the APA report.)</li>
<li>Richard Haier's <i>The Neuroscience of Intelligence</i> (2016), which discusses the question of test bias on pages <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=4fmnDQAAQBAJ&amp;pg=PA17#v=onepage&amp;q&amp;f=false">17-18</a>.</li></ul>
It's important to understand that when these analyses say that IQ tests aren't biased against African-Americans or Latin Americans, this doesn't mean only that racial gaps in IQ scores are the same size as gaps in other areas. It also means that a person with a given IQ will, on average, have the same grades, SAT scores and job performance regardless of their race. With respect to school performance, James Kalat's 2014 textbook <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=EcsaCgAAQBAJ&amp;pg=PT328#v=onepage&amp;q&amp;f=false"><i>Introduction to Psychology</i></a> summarizes the data this way:
<blockquote>Researchers have repeatedly looked for evidence of test bias. However, the evidence indicates that on average the Black students with a given IQ score or other standardized test score do about the same in school as do White students with the same score. [...] Presumably whatever is impairing performance in school is also impairing performance on the tests.</blockquote>
This point is important to remember for anyone who thinks they can discredit research about race and intelligence by attacking the validity of IQ. If IQ tests were somehow discredited or abandoned, the result would only be for psychologists who study this topic to begin focusing their research on the equivalent gaps in one of the other tests, such as the SAT, NAEP, or workplace performance evaluations. This principle is similar to the futility of modern young-Earth creationists arguing that the <i>Archaeopteryx</i> fossils are forgeries. At this point there are several dozen other known species of feathered dinosaurs and primitive birds, so even if the single best-known example were to be discredited, what would it really change?

## Challenges to the consensus view

Challenges to the <i>g</i> model of intelligence can be split roughly into two categories: those from psychologists who have proposed alternative theories, and those from journalists and science communicators who have argued that general intelligence is not a well-supported concept at all. The best-known alternative to the <i>g</i> model is Howard Gardner's <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_multiple_intelligences">theory of multiple intelligences</a>, which proposes that intelligence has no central factor that affects performance on all types of test, and that intelligence should instead be understood as several distinct and unrelated areas of ability.

The theory of multiple intelligences is often brought up in order to try to discredit the concept of IQ, <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=uT6SAgAAQBAJ&amp;pg=PA232#v=onepage&amp;q&amp;f=false">this book</a> being a typical example. However, psychologists—especially those who study human intelligence—do not hold Gardner's theory in such high regard. One of the greatest strengths of the <i>g</i> factor model is its predictive validity, but predictive validity is one major thing that the Theory of Multiple Intelligences is missing. Stuart Ritchie's book (pg. 27) gives the following summary:
<blockquote>In the 1980s the psychologist Howard Gardner argued that, instead of a general factor of intelligence, there are in fact multiple intelligences. These Include 'linguistic' intelligence, 'logical-mathematical' intelligence, 'musical' intelligence, 'interpersonal' intelligence and 'bodily-kinaesthetic' intelligence. Since then he has added 'existential', 'laser', and 'mental searchlight' to the list; there are now around ten in total. He argues that people differ on this whole range of intelligences, and that the intelligences don't necessarily correlate together.

There's just one problem with this theory: there's no evidence for it. Gardner just came up with the concept and added the additional intelligences seemingly on a whim. At no point did he gather any data, or design any tests, to support his idea. The notion of 'multiple intelligences' has become very popular among educators, as a kind of wishful thinking: if a child has poor (say) logical-mathematical-abilities, the argument goes, they might still be good at another kind of intelligence! But denying the huge amount of evidence for general intelligence does nobody any favours. Many of Gardner's 'intelligences' can be conceptualized as skills, or even personality traits, but to describe them as 'intelligences' makes a mockery of the definition of the word. (See <a href="http://www.faculty.mun.ca/cmattatall/Multiple_Intelligences_.pdf">Waterhouse, 2006</a>, for a detailed critique of multiple intelligences.)</blockquote>
More critiques of Gardner's model, along with other similar models, can be found in Earl Hunt's textbook (pg. 111-139), Michael Ashton's textbook (pg. 272-278), and the <a href="http://www.larspenke.eu/pdfs/Deary_Penke_Johnson_2010_-_Neuroscience_of_intelligence_review.pdf">2010 literature review</a> from <i>Nature Reviews: Neuroscience</i> that I cited earlier. Howard Gardner has responded to critiques like these in an odd way. Instead of arguing that the critics are wrong and that his theory is well-supported, in <a href="https://youtu.be/cP4CBpLNEyE?t=2710">this lecture</a> he has argued that whether his theory is correct or incorrect is beside the point:
<blockquote>[E]ven if at the end of the day, the bad guys turn out to be more correct scientifically than I am, life is short, and we have to make choices about how we spend our time. And that’s where I think the multiple intelligences way of thinking about things will continue to be useful, even if the scientific evidence doesn’t support it.</blockquote>
Gardner is a professional psychologist, so he is aware of which direction the evidence points. On the other hand, popular-level books and articles that discuss human intelligence often don't display this degree of knowledge. Examples of this trend are so widespread that it's difficult to choose specific examples, but I'm presenting these four because they're from fairly prominent sources that have the potential to significantly affect the public perception of this topic. The first is in <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=Gr4snwg7iaEC&amp;pg=PT643#v=onepage&amp;q&amp;f=false"><i>The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience</i></a>:
<blockquote>Rather than measuring some qualitatively distinct structure or process as defenders would have us believe, intelligence tests literally only measure the correctness of a variety of learned behaviors—answers to questions on the test—in a contrived context—the test taking situation (<a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2748592/pdf/anverbbehav00035-0126.pdf">Schlinger, 1992<a/>).</blockquote>
The 1992 paper being cited here is a paper about the difficulties of developing artificial intelligence in computers, which only discusses the topic of human intelligence in passing. One shouldn't overlook the irony that in a book intended to expose pseudoscience, that purportedly is presenting the scientific mainstream, this paper would be treated as a higher authority about human intelligence than textbooks devoted to the topic from major academic publishers.

The second example is <a href="http://content.time.com/time/health/article/0,8599,1673952,00.html">this 2007 article</a> from Time magazine:
<blockquote>For another, science has no agreed-upon definition of "intelligence" either — let alone an agreed-upon method to test it. All kinds of cultural biases have been identified in IQ tests, for example.</blockquote>
The third example is <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/14/jason-richwine-heritage-foundation-racism">this 2013 article</a> from <i>The Guardian</i>:
<blockquote>IQ is a metric of such dubiousness that almost no serious educational researcher uses it anymore.</blockquote>
The context is relevant in all three of these cases. <i>The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience</i> made this claim in the context of trying to discredit J. P. Rushton's theory about the r/K selection model applying to human races, Time magazine's claim was made in the context of trying to discredit James Watson's widely-publicized comments about race and intelligence, and <i>The Guardian</i>'s article is intended to debunk the research in this area done by Jason Richwine.  In <i>The Guardian</i>'s case, the psychologist Jelte Wicherts <a href="https://twitter.com/JelteWicherts/status/336501671624577026">responded on Twitter</a> with a rebuttal: Google scholar gave over 10,000 results about IQ for 2013 alone—and this was less than halfway through the year.

These claims are examples of what I described as a "domino effect", where if someone has a foregone conclusion that a hypothesis must be false regardless of what the evidence says, this usually means they must find a way to dismiss every line of data that could be used to support it. Just as one can theoretically be a young-Earth creationist and still accept the existence of feathered dinosaurs, it is not <i>required</i> that IQ tests be meaningless or culturally biased for one to reject Rushton's or Watson's or Richwine's ideas. But conceding that IQ tests are valid for all races would amount to conceding that these people might have evidence for their viewpoints, so when a person is morally committed to rejecting theories about intelligence in relation to race, this usually leads to rejecting the concept of IQ entirely.

The final example I'm going to use is <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=xKsBBQAAQBAJ"><i>The Myth of Race</i></a>, a 2014 book by Robert Wald Sussman. Unlike the first three examples, this book wasn't written in response to any specific person, but it is trying to debunk research about race and intelligence in general:
<blockquote>It is difficult to correlate a measure of IQ, based on a simple concept of a unitary, biologically based “intelligence,” with another false concept of biologically based “races” when neither of these phenomena exist, no matter how tightly many bigoted, bad scientists might still cling to this age-old, culturally based, hateful ideology.</blockquote>
Sussman's book is a particularly powerful example of the domino effect. Its goal is to discredit research about race and IQ, so it argues that the concepts of both race and IQ both must individually be discredited. But Sussman's book goes much further than that. Our understanding of the heritability of intelligence was built upon understanding the heritability of personality traits in general, and one of the best-known behavioral genetics studies is <a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20120227061723/http://www.psych.umn.edu/courses/spring05/hicksb/psy3135/bouchard_1990.pdf">Thomas Bouchard's Minnesota study of identical twins reared apart</a>, so Sussman argues that we must reject Bouchard's credibility as well. Sussman writes:
<blockquote>Bouchard and his researchers used study data to argue for the preponderance of genetics over environment as the main influence over behavior. Although race was not a focus of the MTFS [Minnesota Twin Family Study] research, it is important to remember that modern scientific racism is based on the argument that most human variation in such things as physiology, behavior, and intelligence is biologically based and is not determined or influenced in any important way by environment.</blockquote>
Sussman presents Bouchard's Study as though it were the only study to produce these results, while ignoring the fact that <a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4739500/">its results have been replicated multiple times</a>, by behavioral genetics studies with many different methodologies. And Sussman doesn't stop there: he makes similar comments about E. O. Wilson, the founder of sociobiology, because sociobiology is the source of the fundamental assumption that human personality and behavior is influenced by genes. This series of arguments demonstrates how when you are rejecting one field after another because of their potential to support a hypothesis that you consider unethical, there is no real limit to how far the chain of dominoes can reach.

What makes these arguments particularly striking is that <i>The Myth of Race</i> has received glowing reviews from publications such as <a href="https://www.timeshighereducation.com/books/the-myth-of-race-the-troubling-persistence-of-an-unscientific-idea-by-robert-wald-sussman/2017385.article"><i>Times Higher Education</i></a> and <a href="http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0268580915627099?journalCode=issa"><i>International Sociology Review</i></a>. Apparently, none of these reviewers have a problem with how this book is asking us to reject several decades' worth of research from multiple fields. The reason reviewers accept this outcome is hinted at by the wording they use, which describes Sussman's attack on behavioral genetics as a moral struggle in which he is on the side of good. For example, according to the review at <a href="https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/robert-wald-sussman/the-myth-of-race/">Kirkus</a>, Sussman's book is about a "nasty sociological battle that the good guys have been winning for a century without eliminating a very persistent enemy."

In this area, young-Earth creationists have been slightly more responsible than Liberal Creationists have been. Although no popular PRATT is ever entirely abandoned by the YEC community, both <a href="https://answersingenesis.org/creationism/arguments-to-avoid/">Answers in Genesis</a> and <a href="https://creation.com/arguments-we-think-creationists-should-not-use">Creation Ministries International</a> keep a list of creationist arguments that they know to be fallacious and that they avoid using. For the most part these arguments are not used by the major creationist organizations, and are used only by lesser-known YEC authors and groups. On the other hand, there is no similar set of standards for what claims to allow in most prominently published Liberal Creationist material. For example Sussman's book, despite its rejection of the conclusions of both sociobiology and behavioral genetics, was published by Harvard University Press.

## The cost of ignorance, part 1

In <i>The Blank Slate</i>, Steven Pinker points out that advocates of Liberal Creationism have not been entirely consistent about their rejection of IQ. Just as social scientists' acceptance of a biological explanation for any aspect of human behavior depends on how closely it aligned with their political beliefs (as demonstrated in the <a href="https://www.gwern.net/docs/genetics/2014-horowitz.pdf">Horowitz et al.</a> study), acceptance of the validity of IQ depends on the context in which it is being used:
<blockquote>Nor can citizens or policymakers ignore the concept, regardless of their politics. People who say that IQ is meaningless will quickly invoke it when the discussion turns to executing a murderer with an IQ of 64, removing lead paint that lowers a child’s IQ by five points, or the presidential qualifications of George W. Bush.</blockquote>
In an area like the death penalty, where rejecting IQ entirely would produce an outcome that everyone agrees is unfair, the only possible solution is to fall back on the other claim about IQ tests: that they are culturally biased and underestimate the true ability of minority test-takers. What's unique about this particular case of the domino effect is that it produces a result that, if it were happening for any other reason, would be regarded as racially discriminatory.

In the 2002 Supreme Court case <i>Atkins v. Virginia</i>, it was decided that it violates the Eighth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution to execute a person who is mentally retarded. Mental retardation is diagnosed using IQ tests, with the range of mental retardation being an IQ that's more than two standard deviations below average. (That is, below 70.) However, if one believes that IQ tests are biased against minorities, then that bias must be adjusted for before determining whether a minority defendant can be executed. In other words, if a black and white defendant have committed identical murders and both have a measured IQ of 68, the black defendant will be eligible for the death penalty, but the white defendant will not. The white defendant will be spared the death penalty because his IQ is in the mentally retarded range, but the IQ score of the black defendant must be adjusted upwards to compensate for IQ tests' alleged racial bias.

This situation isn't hypothetical: this sort of race-norming with respect to the death penalty is actually done. (Although it isn't <i>always</i> done—courts have not developed a consistent set of standards in this area.) Several examples of this practice are discussed in <a href="http://www.elliswinters.com/files/Blondel_April2014.pdf">this brief</a> presented to the Supreme Court in 2014, and one such case was discussed in more detail <a href="http://web.archive.org/web/20140831195404/http://dailycaller.com/2014/08/28/how-race-based-iq-handicapping-led-to-a-mans-execution/">here</a>. This quote from the Supreme Court brief describes a typical example:
<blockquote>(O)ther courts have accepted and applied such arguments to sentence minority defendants to death. For example, an Ohio appellate court concluded, relying on the prosecution’s expert, that the defendant’s IQ score of 69 was "artificially lower" because of racial bias. <i>State v. Were</i>, 2005 Ohio 376, 70-81 (Ohio Ct. App. 2005). Because the defendant was black, the court concluded, his IQ did not show mental retardation. <i>Id</i>. The Ohio Supreme 18 Court agreed and affirmed. <i>State v. Were</i>, 890 N.E.2d 263, 293 (Ohio 2008).</blockquote>
This example of the domino effect, and its unintended consequence, is an example of the general principle that James Flynn described in his letter to <i>Nature</i>. Any time we decide that an area of research must be shut down regardless of whether the data supports it or not, along with every line of data which could be used to support that research, we are assuming we've thought of every possible way knowing the truth in this area could have been beneficial. But a lot of the time, it is impossible to know ahead of time all of the ways that knowledge could prove to be more valuable than ignorance. And when society chooses ignorance over knowledge, as they did in this case, it is impossible to predict how that choice may eventually backfire.

# Part 4: Misuse of sources

One of the seedier tactics used by some members of the young-Earth creationist community is to claim that a source says something completely different from what it actually does. A typical example of this tactic is the argument that <i>Archaeopteryx</i> could not be closely-related to the ancestors of birds, because James A. Jensen discovered a fossil of a bird in a stratum dated to tens of millions of years earlier. (Note that this is a separate argument from the one based on <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protoavis"><i>Protoavis</i></a>, which does not require misrepresenting any sources, although in that case the fossil itself appears to have been misinterpreted.) There are several creationist books that make this claim about Jensen's discovery, but one such book is <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=AEk7L24m-P0C"><i>Darwin's Enigma</i></a> by Luther Sunderland, which says this:
<blockquote>In 1977 a geologist from Brigham Young University, James A. Jensen, discovered in the Dry Mesa Quarry of the Morrison Formation in western Colorado a fossil of an unequivocal bird in Lower Jurassic rock. This deposit is dated as 60 million years older than the Upper Jurassic rock in which <i>Archaeopteryx</i> was found.</blockquote>
Anyone who reads this quote, and is familiar with dinosaur paleontology, should immediately be suspicious of Sunderland's summary. The <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morrison_Formation">Morrison Formation</a> is one of the most famous fossil formations in North America, and it's well-known to be Upper Jurassic, not Lower Jurassic. Sunderland's claim about this fossil is cited to a <i>Science News</i> article from September 24, 1977, but this is what the cited article actually says:
<blockquote>The newly discovered bone is of the same period (upper Jurassic) as the <i>Archaeopteryx</i>.</blockquote>
In general, this sort of blatant misrepresentation of a source isn't common from the major creationist organizations. On the other hand, advocates of Liberal Creationism have sometimes been far more brazen in this area than the major YEC organizations have been. There's one example of this principle that stands out as especially representative, concerning what the Human Genome Project concluded about the meaning of race.

## Race and the Human Genome Project

Shortly after the completion of the Human Genome Project, the National Human Genome Center at Howard University held a conference to determine what this new data revealed about the meaning of race in the genomic era. This conference resulted in a team of experts in sociology, anthropology, history and genetics assembling the most authoritative set of statements ever published on what racial divisions mean. The statements were published as a <a href="http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v36/n11s/index.html">special issue of <i>Nature Genetics</i></a> in November 2004.

Francis Collins, the director of the Human Genome Project, provided a <a href="http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v36/n11s/full/ng1436.html">concise statement</a> on what the Human Genome Project had revealed in this area:
<blockquote>Well-intentioned statements over the past few years, some coming from geneticists, might lead one to believe there is no connection whatsoever between self-identified race or ethnicity and the frequency of particular genetic variants. Increasing scientific evidence, however, indicates that genetic variation can be used to make a reasonably accurate prediction of geographic origins of an individual, at least if that individual's grandparents all came from the same part of the world. As those ancestral origins in many cases have a correlation, albeit often imprecise, with self-identified race or ethnicity, it is not strictly true that race or ethnicity has no biological connection. It must be emphasized, however, that the connection is generally quite blurry because of multiple other nongenetic connotations of race, the lack of defined boundaries between populations and the fact that many individuals have ancestors from multiple regions of the world.</blockquote>
Anyone who's taken a 23andme test will know that it's possible to determine a person's geographic origins based on their genetics, because geographic origins are included in the results of these tests. There are relatively few genetic variants that are exclusive to a specific part of the world, so DNA-based ancestry tests work primarily by looking at alleles that vary in frequency from one area to another. Although no single one of these variants is enough to accurately assign a person's ancestry to a specific region, in any region the frequencies of these alleles tend to cluster together, so it is possible to accurately assign a person's ancestry to a region by looking at the overall pattern of correlations. This principle is explained in more detail by <a href="http://www.genomearchitecture.com/static/misc/lewontin_s_fallacy.pdf">this well-known paper</a> by A. W. F. Edwards.

In <a href="http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v36/n11s/full/ng1435.html">another paper</a> published in the same issue of <i>Nature Genetics</i>, Lynn B Jorde and Stephen P Wooding provided a summary of this conclusion:
<blockquote>Genetic variation is geographically structured, as expected from the partial isolation of human populations during much of their history. Because traditional concepts of race are in turn correlated with geography, it is inaccurate to state that race is "biologically meaningless." On the other hand, because they have been only partially isolated, human populations are seldom demarcated by precise genetic boundaries.</blockquote>
The reason for the geographical structure of genetic variation is explained in more detail by <a href="http://genome.cshlp.org/content/19/5/711.full.html">this meta-analysis of several studies</a>. This analysis found that approximately 14% of the human genome had recently been acted on by natural selection, and that the selective pressures varied from one population to another, as different populations became adapted to different environments. The same paper also mentions genetic drift as a second factor that would have produced differences between populations that were isolated from one another for thousands of years.

Several studies have examined this genetic divergence between human ethnic groups, and used it to conduct phylogenetic analyses of their relationships to one another. The largest (as far as I know) of these studies examined 650,000 genetic variants in 1064 individuals from 51 populations, and its conclusions are shown in the cladogram below.

(Cladogram image goes here)

Caption: A cladogram showing the genetic distance between various human ethnic groups, redrawn by Jonathan Kane from <a href="https://med.stanford.edu/tanglab/publications/PDFs/WorldwideHumanRelationshipsInferredFromGenome-WidePatternsOfVariation.pdf">Li et al. 2008</a>. The asterisk indicates the root of the tree, from which all living humans are descended.

On this diagram, each color represents one of the large geographic groups that correspond to traditionally recognized races. The relationships between these groups show that it's somewhat arbitrary how many races one divides humanity into. In the paper that this image is from, South-central Asian, European, and Middle Eastern peoples have been shown as three separate groups, but it would be equally valid to combine all three of these groups into a single "race". One also could either consider Native Americans (the pink group) to be a separate race, or lump them together with East Asians and Oceanians. However, no matter how large or small of a cluster one considers to be a "race", each race will still correspond to a specific section of the cladogram, and to the allele frequencies that this portion of the chart represents. So in that respect, races correspond to biological populations, although it's arbitrary where one chooses to draw the boundary between one "race" and the next.

There also is another sense that racial divisions have sometimes been arbitrary: in the past, racially diverse countries have invented inconsistent rules about how to classify people who have ancestry from more than one continent. The most infamous of these was the "one-drop rule", where in the United States only a minuscule amount of sub-Saharan African ancestry was enough to classify a person as "black". However, <a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1196372/">this study</a> found that in the 21st century, a person's self-identified race and their biogeographic ancestry are consistent with one another the vast majority of the time. Of the 3,636 subjects examined, only 5 (0.14%) belonged predominantly to a genetic cluster different from their racial identity. (Presumably if Rachel Dolezal had been part of this study, she would have been among the 0.14%.)

In this article's previous section, I emphasized how the conclusions that I described about the nature of intelligence were presented this way in all major textbooks on the topic, but with respect to the meaning of race it is not so easy to determine what the mainstream position is. The Human Genome Project papers still are consistently cited as the authoritative research about the genetic meaning of race, so in that respect the conclusions that I've described here are entirely mainstream also. However, in the 21st century, discussions of race in both popular and scholarly sources have increasingly become dominated by discussions about the wrongness of racial discrimination and the need to prevent it. This is not a bad thing in of itself, but it has caused the empirical conclusions of the Human Genome Project and other similar research to become distorted.

## The reversal

Although the <i>Nature genetics</i> papers I've cited above are open access, most lay people don't get their science news directly from peer-reviewed journals, so it's up to journalists and science educators to accurately communicate these conclusions to the general public. The most prominent newspaper to discuss these papers was the <i>London Times</i>, which covered them in an article titled, <a href="https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/gene-tests-prove-that-we-are-all-the-same-under-the-skin-5rr560hk6r2">"Gene tests prove that we are all the same under the skin"</a>. The article's subtitle is, "Racists’ central argument and theories linking intelligence to ethnic origin have been destroyed", and the article itself states:
<blockquote>The popular notion that skin colour can indicate physical or mental differences between groups of people has been demolished by a new analysis of the human genome, which <b>declares race to be a biologically meaningless concept.</b> (Emphasis added.)</blockquote>
The <i>London Times</i>' coverage of this journal issue raises two questions. First, when reporting on a series of papers that concluded "it is inaccurate to state that race is 'biologically meaningless'", why did the <i>London Times</i> state that this journal issue "declares race to be a biologically meaningless concept"? By reporting that these papers concluded <i>the exact opposite</i> of what they actually did, the <i>London Times</i> has gone beyond the practices of the major YEC organizations, and engaged in a Sunderland-like level of misrepresentation. And second, the <i>Nature Genetics</i> paper barely mentioned research about race and intelligence (it's mentioned in passing in <a href="http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v36/n11s/full/ng1456.html">one</a> of the papers), so why did the <i>London Times</i> make that topic the focus of their article?

These questions apply to far more than just the <i>London Times</i>. In the time since the <i>Nature Genetics</i> papers were published in 2004, this claim about the conclusions of the Human Genome Project has become commonplace in the social science literature, and authors have used several citation tricks to reverse the conclusions of the research they're discussing. While many of these tricks seem superficially clever, all of them were in fact borrowed from young-Earth creationists.

One example of the claim is <a href="http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9780470015902.a0005689/abstract?userIsAuthenticated=false&amp;deniedAccessCustomisedMessage=">this 2006 paper</a> by Jon Beckwith and Joseph S. Alper:
<blockquote>Despite the unanimity among genome investigators that the concept of race is biologically meaningless, some observers remain concerned that research into the genetics of group differences will provide fodder for racist views.</blockquote>
Although this paper purports to summarize the Human Genome Project's conclusions, it does not actually cite any of the papers that announced this project's conclusions with respect to the meaning of race. Instead, its summary of the Human Genome Project is based entirely on press releases and interviews from before the project was complete. This tactic is easiest to see by looking at the dates in the paper's references: Beckwith and Alper's paper was published in 2006, and the Human Genome Project was completed in 2003, but all of this paper's sources are from 2000 or earlier.

This trick was previously used by Answers in Genesis in <a href="https://answersingenesis.org/intelligent-design/100-years-of-airplanes-werent-the-first-flying-machines/">this article</a> from 2003, which argued that dinosaurs had bellows-like lungs that could not have evolved into those of birds. This claim is cited to a <a href="http://science.sciencemag.org/content/278/5341/1267">1997 paper</a> by John Ruben about the lungs of <i>Sinosauropteryx</i>, but AIG neglected to mention is that the same fossil was <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/publication/40662049_Anatomy_of_Sinosauropteryx_prima_from_Liaoning_Northeastern_China">examined again in 2001</a> by Phil Currie, concluding that the features discussed by Ruben were an artifact of how the animal was preserved. (AIG has cited Ruben's paper while ignoring Currie's in several later articles too, but as far as I know the 2003 article was the first time they did this.) From both young-Earth creationists and Liberal Creationists, this trick is to claim that you're summarizing the current state of research while only citing sources that are out of date, and ignoring newer sources that have superseded them.

A newer example of this claim about the Human Genome Project can be found in <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=CY-jAQAAQBAJ&amp;pg=PA190#v=onepage&amp;q&amp;f=false">this book from 2013</a>:
<blockquote>The Human Genome Project (HGP) has found that there is no genetic or biological basis for the social distinctions that are often invoked to classify people into "races" (Graves, this volume; <a href="http://web.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/elsi/humanmigration.shtml">Human Genome Project 2012</a>; <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=zXc1lgMQoQkC">Morning 2011<a/>).

[...]

Since the Human Genome Project discovered that "race" is genetically meaningless, this approach maintains that it makes no sense to invoke race as an analytical concept at all.</blockquote>
Like the Beckwith and Alper paper, although this book discusses the conclusions of the Human Genome Project, it does not cite any of the papers where these conclusions were announced. In this case all of its sources about these conclusions are second-hand or third-hand summaries, and all of these summaries, if not entirely wrong, are either slanted or incomplete. For example, the source that's cited as "Human Genome Project 2012" is a web page published by Oak Ridge National Laboratory (not by the Human Genome Project), whose discussion about the meaning of race is cited exclusively to the <i>Nature Genetics</i> papers, but this page omits any mention of the papers' conclusions about the correlation between race and geographically-based genetic variation. The 2013 book's summary of these summaries has altered their conclusions a little more, allowing the reversal of the Human Genome Project's conclusions to occur in several steps.

This trick was previously used by Creation Ministries international in their <a href="https://creation.com/a-i-milano-mutation-evidence-for-evolution">article about Alipoprotein AI</a>, a mutation that increases the specificity of a protein in humans and is a health benefit to people who have it. CMI (which at the time was the same organization as AiG) argued that this mutation did not increase protein specificity, and they cited this argument to press releases about the mutation, which were not a totally accurate summary the original research papers about it. The problem with this claim was explained <a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/information/apolipoprotein.html">here</a> at Talk.Origins. From both young-Earth creationists and Liberal Creationists, this trick is to cite sources that are as far removed as possible from the data you're discussing, allowing the summary to become less and less accurate as it's passed from one source to the next, like the childhood game of Telephone.

The author of the 2013 book chapter that I've quoted (and one of the two editors of the entire book) is <a href="http://sociology.unm.edu/people/faculty/profile/Nancy%20Lopez.html">Nancy Lopez</a>, the director of the Institute for the Study of "Race" and Social Justice at the University of New Mexico. This is relevant because aside from the Human Genome Project, the largest collective effort to establish a consensus on the meaning of race among scientists from multiple disciplines probably is a <a href="http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ajpa.20995/abstract">conference held at the University of New Mexico in 2007</a>. This conference was attended by specialists in human biology, genetics, forensics, bioarcheology, and paleoanthropology, and its conclusions were presented in a <a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19226646">special issue of the <i>American Journal of Physical Anthropology</i></a> in 2009. An overall summary was given in <a href="http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ajpa.20900/abstract">this paper</a> by John Relethford:
<blockquote>Does the global pattern of phenotypic variation seen in skin color and craniometric traits support the idea of race? The answer depends on initial definitions and use of the term "race." On the one hand, the idea of discrete races in the typological mindset of past centuries clearly does not apply to humans (<a href="http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1525/aa.1998.100.3.632/full">Templeton, 1998</a>; <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=I_DEQgAACAAJ">Graves, 2001</a>). There is, however, geographic patterning to human biological variation, both for traits affected strongly by natural selection, such as skin color, and for traits whose distribution tends, on average, to be more neutral, such as craniometrics and many genetic polymorphisms. I suggest that typical uses of the concept of geographic race today are simply crude labels imposed upon this geographically structured variation. In that sense, race is culturally constructed, as all labels are, but it is also based on an underlying reality of biological variation. Rather than argue about whether race is a cultural construct (an idea that many unfortunately take as being equivalent to a denial of variation) or that race is "real," it might be more useful to consider race as a culturally constructed label that crudely and imprecisely describes real variation.</blockquote>
Why did Nancy Lopez avoid mentioning this conference and its conclusions in her book? It was conducted at her own university in her own area of specialty while she was a professor there, so she could not have possibly been unaware of it. This is similar to a question I asked in my <a href="https://pandasthumb.org/archives/2016/11/creationist-class.html">post from 2016</a>: When Answers in Genesis argues that animals such as <i>Microraptor</i> and <i>Anchiornis</i> should be classified as birds, why do they never mention that the creationist technical literature classifies them as dinosaurs? In that case too, the evidence suggests AIG is aware of the research that contradicts their viewpoint, and that they have made a deliberate decision to not mention it.

I don't mean to suggest that Lopez and Beckwith / Alper intentionally copied their tactics from Answers in Genesis, but that doesn't mean the similarity is coincidental. When young-Earth creationists either directly misrepresent sources, or use the other tricks described here, it's because they are arguing for a viewpoint that they chose based on their interpretation of the Bible, and viewpoints arrived at this way often are impossible to support by citing the primary literature in a straightforward manner. As described in this article's second section, both young-Earth creationism and Liberal Creationism share the basic principle of accepting or rejecting ideas for reasons unrelated to whether the physical evidence supports them, and this similarity in philosophy inevitably produces a similarity in tactics.

## Unfortunate ambiguity

I think there also is another reason that the conclusions of the Human Genome Project papers have been so often reversed, that particularly affects authors such as Lopez who do not cite the primary literature directly. Summaries of this literature from anthropologists, while almost never directly misrepresenting it, still tend to use terms in ambiguous ways.

As Relethford points out, the statement that race is "culturally constructed" can easily be misinterpreted to mean that it has no basis in biology at all. The same problem applies to statements such as "<a href="http://www.americananthro.org/ConnectWithAAA/Content.aspx?ItemNumber=2583">Racial myths bear no relationship to the reality of human capabilities or behavior.</a>" The context of this statement suggests that by "racial myths" it's referring to the typological view of race that was popular in the 19th century, but the statement also could be taken to mean (for example) that Tibetans do not have a greater capability to survive at high altitudes than other human populations do. Taken the first way, the statement is more or less true, but taken the second way <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/David_Witherspoon/publication/44596336_Genetic_Evidence_for_High-Altitude_Adaptation_in_Tibet/links/0fcfd50a3c4dfe5bdb000000/Genetic-Evidence-for-High-Altitude-Adaptation-in-Tibet.pdf">it is false</a>. When anthropologists use these sorts of vague statements, they make it easy for journalists and social scientists to exercise their confirmation bias, and to assume these statements mean whatever is the most convenient.

<a href="http://www.krepublishers.com/02-Journals/T-Anth/Anth-09-0-000-000-2007-Web/Anth-09-1-000-000-2007-Abst-PDF/Anth-09-1-073-078-2007-422-%20%8Atrkalj-G/Anth-09-1-073-078-2007-422-%20%8Atrkalj-G-Tt.pdf">This literature review</a> found that anthropologists' attitudes towards racial categories varies from one part of the world to another. Anthropologists tend to discourage the use of these categories in the United States and Western Europe, due to the history of racial discrimination in these parts of the world, but tend to regard them as useful divisions in Eastern Europe and China, where the political connotations of race are more neutral or positive. For example <a href="http://www.newsobserver.com/opinion/op-ed/article178156156.html">this article</a> co-written by Edward Liebow, the executive director of the American Anthropological Association, explains how the AAA has worked to promote the viewpoints about race that it feels will be most helpful to improving race relations in the United States. The pursuit of this political goal, weighed against the professional obligation to avoid presenting information that is outright false, inevitably leads to these sorts of ambiguous statements that emphasize some lines of data and downplay others.

I think this trend is unfortunate, and not only because it's unhelpful from a science education standpoint. As I'll explain later in this section, it also has encouraged a way of thinking about race that has probably made race relations worse instead of better. It would be preferable if everyone could make an effort to describe this data in clear and unambiguous terms, the way Relethford and the Human Genome Project papers have done.

## The motive behind the arguments

In a <a href="https://philpapers.org/archive/PIGWAW.pdf">paper from 2013</a>, Massimo Pigliucci has answered the question I posed about why the <i>London Times</i> misrepresented the conclusions of the Human Genome Project the way it did, as well as why it focused on a topic (race and intelligence) that was barely mentioned in the journal issue it was covering. Pigliucci writes:
<blockquote>Of course, anyone who has seriously looked into this endless debate knows very well that here is where the stakes really lie: it is not about small genetic differences that may or may not help build a more individualized medicine; it is not about forensic anthropologists and how well they do their work; it is about claims that one race has superior or inferior intellectual capabilities than other ones, and it is because of this possibility that debates about race in biology so easily become over-heated.</blockquote>
In the paper that I'm quoting, Pigliucci takes a somewhat less extreme stance than the other sources I've discussed. He does not claim that race is biologically <i>meaningless</i>, but that it has a sufficiently different meaning from biogeographic ancestry that comparisons of general intelligence (or any other biological trait) between races cannot produce a meaningful result. This is a common argument among people who want to  rule out any connection between race and intelligence <i>a priori</i>, but without stooping to the level of misrepresenting what genetics papers have said.

What this argument overlooks is that for race (as defined by society) to correlate with general intelligence, or with any other biological trait, it isn't necessary for race to have a biologically rigorous or consistent definition. If race has <i>any</i> correlation with biological or genetic traits, even only an imprecise one, it is possible for race to correlate with traits and genes that affect general intelligence. Modern researchers who write about race and intelligence don't claim that intelligence is biologically determined by race, and anyone who attacks that perspective (such as <a href="http://s3.amazonaws.com/rdcms-aaa/files/production/public/FileDownloads/pdfs/cmtes/minority/upload/AAA_Statement_on-_Race_Intelligence1994.pdf">this statement</a> from the American Anthropological Association) is attacking a strawman. An example of how modern intelligence researchers understand the relation between race and biology can be found in Earl Hunt's textbook (pg. 408):
<blockquote>While it is true that within-group genetic variation is greater than between-group variation, the amount of genetic variation between groups is quite sufficient, statistically, to make accurate assignments associating an individual with one of the three largest groups of origin in the United States—African, European, and East Asian. (<a href="http://www.nature.com/nrg/journal/v5/n8/full/nrg1401.html">124</a>) There also is a high level of agreement between self-identification as White, Black, East Asian, or Latino and assignment of a person to clusters based upon similarities of their genomes. (<a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1196372/">125</a>) While there is no one defining characteristic, other than self-identification, that assigns someone to a particular racial/ethnic groups, identification of a person as a members of a racial/ethnic group will <i>probabilistically</i> tell us something about that persons' standing on a variety of social and biological variables.</blockquote>
Note that this summary is very similar to what was stated in the <i>Nature Genetics</i> papers. Hunt subsequently explains (pg. 409-410) how this correlation is relevant to the study of racial gaps in test scores:
<blockquote>Race and ethnicity are seldom causal variables in themselves. The only exceptions are in studies of the reactions of others to a person of a given race, and studies of the effects of self-identify on people's conceptions of themselves. [...] Outside of such situations, a researcher who studies a correlation between racial/ethnic status and a test score is studying the correlation between the score and the many possibly causal variables correlated with race and ethnicity. These include educational status, biological distinctions, health and wealth, and a variety of beliefs and behavioral practices.</blockquote>
A study that's informative as to how race could potentially correlate with biological factors that affect intelligence is <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960982215006715">Fan et al. 2015</a>. This study found that the brain's cortical geometry varies between people of European, East Asian, West African, and Native American descent. A similar, older study that looked at ethnic group differences in a different aspect of brain anatomy is <a href="http://syslearn.oregonstate.edu/instruction/anth/smith/TimeMach1984.pdf">Beals et al. 1984</a>. These studies are a powerful refutation of the <i>London Times</i>' claim that "We are all the same under the skin". Differences between human populations don't apply only to superficial traits such as skin color or hair texture—in some cases, they also apply to the structure of our brains.

Cortical geometry does not have any known relation to general intelligence, so the Fan et al. study does not provide any direct evidence either way as to the cause of racial gaps in test scores. However, this study is relevant to the topic of race and intelligence in an indirect sense, because it demonstrates the type of result that could hypothetically be obtained by studies about other aspects of brain anatomy. As described in the previous section (and Richard Haier's book), there are several other aspects of brain anatomy that are known to affect general intelligence, and Haier's book also mentions that general intelligence and these neurological variables are affected by many of the same genes. There has been relatively little research about geographic variation in brain structure, but future studies may eventually show that some of these other aspects of brain anatomy vary according to ancestry in the same way that cortical geometry does.<sup><a name="4" href="#Winegard">4</a></sup>

As long as race has any correlation with biology or genetics, even an imprecise one, it is possible for these sorts of geographically-based differences in brain anatomy to affect racial IQ averages. How journalists and some social scientists have reacted to this possibility is another example of what I described as a domino effect. Ordinarily, it would not have been necessary to widely misreport a conclusion that was published in <i>Nature Genetics</i>, but this conclusion allows for the possibility that race could correlate with biological traits or genes that affect general intelligence. So for the reason explained by Pigliucci, this otherwise harmless conclusion is frequently remembered as having been the exact opposite of what it actually was.

## The cost of ignorance, part 2

To social scientists who believe that race has literally no relation to biology, this assumption raises the question of how and why society created racial categories out of thin air. Examining this question is the focus of a field of social science research known as Whiteness Studies. The basic premise of Whiteness Studies is that since racial categories have no basis in biology, it follows that they were created by whites as a means to enforce oppression of other groups. In particular, the existence of a Caucasian or white race is viewed as having been socially engineered to act as a ruling class, so that the concept of being white (a.k.a. "whiteness") has no meaning except as a way of holding power over non-white people.

On the basis of this assumption, scholars of Whiteness Studies have argued that the logical next step is to abolish the concept of being white. That conclusion is explained in <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=lvwEfesT2jQC&amp;pg=PA346#v=onepage&amp;q&amp;f=false">this book chapter</a>, which directly references the idea of race being biologically meaningless as a justification for what it's proposing. The aforementioned chapter is one of the foundational writings of the branch of Whiteness Studies known as Neo-abolitionism, which is concerned not only with the critical study of whiteness but also its abolition. Neo-abolitionism is one of two major schools of thought within Whiteness Studies, the other being Rearticulation; the two positions are contrasted in <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Sharon_Chubbuck/publication/250184761_Whiteness_Enacted_Whiteness_Disrupted_The_Complexity_of_Personal_Congruence/links/57374d9608ae298602e1a3f7.pdf">this paper</a>. (In the Whiteness Studies literature, Neo-abolitionism is often just called "abolitionism", but I'm including the "neo" prefix to distinguish it from the people who worked to abolish slavery in the 19th century.)

Whiteness Studies have experienced an explosion of popularity in the past few years, with programs such as <a href="https://www.pcc.edu/about/diversity/cascade/whiteness-history-month/">Whiteness History Month</a> and online courses such as <a href="https://compassionateactivism.leadpages.co/htw-program-jan-2017/">Healing from Toxic Whiteness</a> now marketing the field to college students and to the general public. Some of these courses, such as <a href="http://nypost.com/2017/06/01/college-offers-course-on-abolition-of-whiteness/">"Abolition of Whiteness"</a>, take an explicitly Neo-abolitionist point of view. As these ideas have grown in popularity, they have percolated into other areas of social science. A typical example of how Neo-abolitionist ideas have impacted other fields is <a href="http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0021934716638802">this 2016 paper</a> from the <i>Journal of Black Studies</i>, which extensively cites the Neo-abolitionist literature. This paper's author mostly agrees with Whiteness Studies as a factual description of society, but argues that the goal of abolishing whiteness cannot be achieved through reason alone:
<blockquote>Whiteness as a psychosis goes beyond critiquing the irrationality of Whiteness. Rather, Whiteness is defined in itself and at its root as irrational, a discursive psychosis that cannot be tamed through reason.

[...]

There is no rational argument to those trapped in a psychosis, as there is no reasoning with Whiteness. Until the conditions that create Whiteness are destroyed, the psychosis will govern the thoughts and actions of Western society.</blockquote>
This idea, that it is necessary to destroy the conditions that create whiteness, is not a fringe idea. A basic premise of Whiteness Studies is that being Caucasian or "white" is itself a form of power over other groups, so to destroy the conditions that create whiteness would be to eliminate every possible means by which that power could exist. Three recent efforts towards this goal are the <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2015/08/21/we-used-to-count-black-americans-as-35-of-a-person-instead-of-reparations-give-them-53-of-a-vote/?utm_term=.81847b24bf62">proposal in the <i>Washington Post</i></a> that the votes of African-Americans should be weighted more heavily than those of white Americans, the <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/01/opinion/when-the-left-turns-on-its-own.html">demand</a> at Evergreen State College that all white professors leave the campus for a day, and the <i>Huffington Post</i> editors' <a href="https://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/2017/04/19/huffpost-publishes-post-urging-that-white-men-be-disenfranchised-first-defends-it-and-then-removes-it-because-it-was-a-hoax/">defense</a> of an article arguing that white men across the world should be disenfranchised and have their property confiscated, until the article was eventually discovered to have been written as a parody. As far as I can tell, most critics of contemporary leftist racial identity politics haven't tried to trace these ideas back to their intellectual roots, but the ideas don't come from nowhere—the worldview that supports them is routinely taught in Whiteness Studies courses on college campuses. (I'll discuss one teaching method used by these classes later in the article.)

Of course, the viewpoint that race is biologically meaningless does not <i>necessarily</i> lead to these sorts of proposals, just as the viewpoint that it correlates with genetic traits does not necessarily lead to slavery or segregation laws. In both cases, it's quite easy to say that nothing we discover about the meaning of race can change the fact that treating people unequally based on their race is morally wrong. But both the idea that race correlates with biological traits and the idea that it's biologically meaningless are ideas that <i>can</i> be abused, so a person who wants to prevent discrimination would potentially have similar reasons for opposing either idea. Or alternatively, they could recognize that almost any scientific hypothesis has the potential to be used for either benefit or harm, so this is not an effective approach to use for choosing one hypothesis over another.

# Part 5: The 2017 race and intelligence debates

In the first section of this article, I mentioned that one of my motivations for writing it was the reaction against Charles Murray that occurred at Middlebury College last year. Murray's lecture at Middlebury did not have anything to do with race or intelligence, and blind assessments have <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/15/opinion/sunday/charles-murrays-provocative-talk.html ">rated its political position as centrist</a>. However, Murray is most famous as the co-author of <i>The Bell Curve</i>, and reactions to his lecture were not so much directed against the lecture itself as they were against Murray as a person. These reactions, both in the short term from student protesters and in the longer term from journalists and academics, are a microcosm of how society has reacted to research about race and IQ in general.

## Postmodern creationism

Murray was invited to speak at Middlebury by a student group associated with the American Enterprise Institute, a right-leaning think tank, about his recent book <i>Coming Apart</i>, which discusses how American has become divided along political and class lines. When the plans for him to speak at Middlebury became known, several faculty members who consider Murray a racist encouraged students to organize a protest. Numerous newspapers provided accounts of the protests, but one of the best is <a href="http://www.newsweek.com/charles-murray-my-free-speech-ordeal-middlebury-564419">Murray's own account</a>, which was published in <i>Newsweek</i>.

The protest began when Murray took the stage, with protestors chanting in unison loudly enough to drown him out. When it became clear he would not be able to deliver his lecture as intended, he was moved to a separate room so that Allison Stanger, a Middlebury professor of international politics and economics, could interview him on video. The student protestors then pulled the fire alarm, drowning him out there as well, although Stanger still conducted the interview to the best of her ability. When Murray and Stanger eventually tried to leave, the protestors swarmed them, grabbed Stanger by the hair, and twisted her neck, giving her a concussion. According to an <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/13/opinion/understanding-the-angry-mob-that-gave-me-a-concussion.html">account by Stanger in the <i>New York Times</i></a>, eleven days later she was still wearing a neck brace.

This particular aspect of Liberal Creationism doesn't have a precise equivalent among the young-Earth type. Although there exist websites such as <a href="http://blog.creation.org/category/dawkins-watch/">Dawkins Watch</a> devoted to disparaging well-known evolutionary biologists, I'm not aware of any cases where these efforts from YECs have snowballed into physical violence. However, there is a similarity between Liberal Creationism and young-Earth creationism in this area, too. To find it one most look at the specific justification that the Middlebury protesters gave for preventing Murrary from speaking, which is quoted in <a href="http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2017/03/is-intersectionality-a-religion.html">this article</a>:
<blockquote>These are not ideas that can be fairly debated, it is not ‘representative’ of the other side to give a platform to such dangerous ideologies. There is not a potential for an equal exchange of ideas. [...] Science has always been used to legitimize racism, sexism, classism, transphobia, ableism, and homophobia, all veiled as rational and fact, and supported by the government and state. <b>In this world today, there is little that is true 'fact.'</b> (Emphasis added.)</blockquote>
The viewpoint of these protesters was described in the 2017 ISIR presentation as "Postmodern Creationism", and it carries the viewpoint of people such as Turkheimer to its logical conclusion. Instead of just arguing that there are certain specific areas where the truth or falsehood of an idea is determined by its moral implications, Postmodern Creationism takes the perspective that <i>in general</i>, scientific hypothesis cannot be objectively considered supported or unsupported, because which "facts" you choose to accept is only a question of where you stand politically. The viewpoint is explained in more detail by <a href="https://theoutline.com/post/2307/quillette-claire-lehmann-conservative-snowflakes">this article at <i>The Outline</i></a> discussing the online magazine <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quillette">Quillette</a>:
<blockquote><i>Quillette</i> takes the centrist obsession with objectivity and facts, the centrist’s only antidote to “fake news,” and applies it to academia. What <i>Quillette</i>’s fans fail to realize is that facts are constantly in flux. [...] Science has never been apolitical; the only people who benefit from the notion that “reason” is not subjective are those people whose lives aren’t already politicized.<sup><a name="5" href="#Davis">5</a></sup>
</blockquote>
This viewpoint is the left's equivalent of Kellyanne Conway's "alternative facts". But even before this line of argument became popular among either Postmodern Creationists or the Trump administration, it was being used by young-Earth creationists. In <a href="https://answersingenesis.org/evidence-for-creation/searching-for-the-magic-bullet/">this article from 2003</a>, Answers in Genesis argues that there is no such thing as evidence for a specific viewpoint about the age of the Earth, because facts and evidence do not exist independently of how we interpret them:
<blockquote>My point is that if we Christians really understood that all evidence is actually interpreted on the basis of certain presuppositions, then we wouldn’t be in the least bit intimidated by the evolutionists’ supposed ‘evidence.’ [...] The bottom line is that it’s not a matter of who has the better (or the most) ‘facts on their side.’ We need to understand that there are no such things as brute facts—<i>all</i> facts are interpreted. (Emphasis in original.)</blockquote>
It's important to recognize that if the Middlebury protesters and Answers in Genesis are right about the nature of facts and reason, then this principle would apply to far more than just psychology, biology, or the age of the Earth. It would mean that every scientific conclusion that's widely-accepted—such as that Earth's climate is warming, that vaccines do not cause autism, or that the Earth orbits the sun—is really just a political decision to interpret the data in a certain way. I hope this viewpoint does not become widely-accepted in academia, because if it does, it has the potential to pull the rug out from under the past several centuries of scientific discoveries.

## Responses to Charles Murray

During the months following the Middlebury incident, a few high-profile sources gave in-depth coverage to Murray's opinions on race and IQ. The first two sources to cover it were <a href="https://www.vox.com/the-big-idea/2017/3/28/15078400/scientific-racism-murray-alt-right-black-muslim-culture-trump">this article</a> at Vox in March 2017, and Sam Harris' <a href="https://www.samharris.org/podcast/item/forbidden-knowledge">interview with Murray on his podcast</a> the following month. In his interview with Murray, Sam Harris regards him as a scholar whose views are worth taking seriously. On the other hand, the Vox article implicitly makes the same argument that was made by Turkheimer and the Harvard Statement: that what truly matters about a hypothesis is whether or not it is racist, and that it is beside the point whether or not the empirical evidence supports it.

The Vox article soon began to generate complaints for its ignoring of the distinction between political questions and scientific ones. Possibly the most prominent critic was Garett Jones, who wrote an <a href="http://web.archive.org/web/20170629213144/https:/twitter.com/GarettJones/status/846923004881731584">open letter</a> to the editors of Vox in a now-deleted Tweet. I think the textbook Jones is referring to from Oxford University Press probably is the second edition of N. J. Mackintosh's <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=BcKcAQAAQBAJ"><i>IQ and Human Intelligence</i></a> (2011, updated from the first edition published in 1998). The one he's referring to from Cambridge University Press could be either Hunt's <i>Human Intelligence</i> or Haier's <i>The Neuroscience of Intelligence</i>, since <i>The Bell Curve</i> is cited in them both.

Following the complaints about their first article, Vox made a second attempt in May 2017. Unlike their first article, their <a href="https://www.vox.com/the-big-idea/2017/5/18/15655638/charles-murray-race-iq-sam-harris-science-free-speech">second article</a> tried to provide a legitimate rebuttal to the argument Murray had presented in his interview with Sam Harris, and it was written by three professionals: Eric Turkheimer, Kathryn Paige Harden, and Richard E. Nisbett. However, this article soon began to face criticism also. Four articles that criticized it were <a href="https://medium.com/@houstoneuler/the-cherry-picked-science-in-voxs-charles-murray-article-bd534a9c4476">this one</a> at Medium.com, an <a href="https://gnxp.nofe.me/2017/05/18/the-misrepresentation-of-genetic-science-in-the-vox-piece-on-race-and-iq/">article at Gene Expression</a> by Razib Khan, <a href="http://quillette.com/2017/06/02/getting-voxed-charles-murray-ideology-science-iq/">this article</a> by four authors at Quillette, and a <a href="http://quillette.com/2017/06/11/no-voice-vox-sense-nonsense-discussing-iq-race/">second Quillette article</a> by Richard Haier. Turkheimer, Harden and Nisbett responded to these critiques in a <a href="https://www.vox.com/the-big-idea/2017/6/15/15797120/race-black-white-iq-response-critics">third Vox article</a>, and the author of the Medium.com article updated his original article to address their points.

As I said earlier, there isn't enough space in this article for me to adequately cover the debate over the cause of racial test score gaps. If anyone is interested in learning more about the arguments for and against a genetic component, I recommend listening to Sam Harris' interview with Murray, and reading the two articles at Vox by Turkheimer et al. along with the four responses. The original Vox article from March 2017 isn't particularly informative, except as an example of how when people such as Murray present scientific arguments about race and intelligence, society's first instinct is to answer them with appeals to emotion.

There is one point arising from this debate that I do intend to respond to in depth, though. It is an argument made in <a href="http://www.nationalreview.com/article/449208/race-iq-debate-serves-no-purpose">this <i>National Review</i> article</a> by John McWhorter in July 2017, which suggested that research to identify the cause of racial IQ gaps isn't worth doing, because if they have a genetic cause we would be better off not knowing about it.

## Why knowledge is valuable

McWhorter's article received a <a href="http://www.nationalreview.com/article/449388/race-iq-dont-obsess-over-it-do-discuss-it">response from Jonathan Anomaly and Brian Boutwell</a>, and their rebuttal is fairly good overall. However, this response presents research about race and intelligence as being important primarily because of the inherent scientific value in understanding the world as accurately as possible. While this is a point worth making, Boutwell and Anomaly neglected to discuss an even more important point, which I mentioned earlier in the article: in any area where the relationship between race and intelligence has the potential to impact our lives or our actions, it is useful to make sure our decisions are as informed as possible.

In theory, if society were completely colorblind, race differences in average test scores could and should be ignored. But even when society can ignore the results of IQ tests themselves, it has never been able to ignore racial disparities in the various areas where IQ predicts success, such as educational achievement or employment in high-paying jobs. For example, in the <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2015/08/21/we-used-to-count-black-americans-as-35-of-a-person-instead-of-reparations-give-them-53-of-a-vote/?utm_term=.e0829a19dc95"><i>Washington Post</i> article</a> proposing that the value of a person's vote should depend on their race, one of the main justifications given for this proposal is the fact that the economic inequality between black and white Americans was about the same size in 2015 that it had been in 1963. The reality is that society will always be paying close attention to these sorts of inequalities, and offering proposals about what to do about them, and whether or not these proposals are reasonable depends in a large part on what's causing the inequalities that they're intended to address.

As I mentioned in Jason Richwine's case, I also think it's a bad idea for people presenting research about race and intelligence in a scientific context to also offer specific policy suggestions, because it's important to avoid giving the impression that this research dictates any <i>specific</i> policy. In areas such as immigration or affirmative action, the most important question that goes into any policy is what our goals are, and data from psychology or genetics can't answer that question. However, there are a few areas where the practical applications of this research don't involve making any such value judgments, or where the only value judgment involved is one that almost no reasonable person could disagree with.
<ol><li>Numerous efforts have been made by the Federal government to eliminate racial gaps in educational achievement by improving the quality of public schools, a recent example being the No Child Left Behind act. (Recall that IQ predicts educational achievement equally well regardless of race, and that according to James Kalat's <i>Introduction to Psychology</i>, racial gaps in educational achievement probably have the same cause as the IQ gaps.) The No Child Left Behind act required schools to reduce these gaps or risk losing federal subsidies.

This threat of lost funding was reasonable if the gaps are being caused by ethnic groups receiving education of unequal quality. But on the other hand, if the gaps are being caused by some other factor outside of school, then it's unfair to punish schools for something that's beyond their ability to control. This point—that the demands we place on schools should be informed by research about how much or how little they're to blame for the gaps—is made by Earl Hunt and Jerry Carlson in their <a href="https://humanvarietiesdotorg.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/hunt-carlson-2007.pdf">2007 paper</a> that was cited in Stuart Ritchie's book.</li>
<li>As it turns out, <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/29/education/29scores.html">No Child Left Behind did not substantially reduce the size of the gaps.</a> The No Child Left Behind Act had one major flaw: it was not paired with any serious effort to diagnose the <i>cause</i> of the gaps, and in general, in order to fix a problem it's necessary to first know what's causing it. For example, improving public schools is the right solution if the gaps are caused by differences in quality of education. But if their main cause is infectious diseases in early childhood (which are known to sometimes depress IQ), it would have done more to close the gaps if the funding for the No Child Left Behind Act had instead gone towards improving the quality of pediatric care.

This principle, that closing the test score gaps will be possible only if we understand their cause, is true even if the gaps are shown to have a genetic basis. With an understanding of the specific genes involved, it often is possible to ameliorate genetic effects by developing targeted environmental interventions to change how those genes are expressed. This possibility with respect to IQ is mentioned in the Hunt & Carlson paper, and in <a href="https://www.timeshighereducation.com/opinion/closing-the-achievement-gap-the-intelligent-way">this article</a> Richard Haier discusses it specifically as a way to close achievement gaps in schools. There is only one thing that could make it truly impossible to close the gaps, and that is if we keep ourselves in a state of ignorance about their cause because we're too afraid to conduct research in this area.

I think it's important to be optimistic about this aspect of the topic while writing about race and intelligence. Given the current pace of research, it is fairly likely that we'll know within the next decade whether the gaps in IQ and other tests have a genetic basis or not. And when we do, we will be closer to eliminating them than we've ever been before.</li>
<li>As discussed <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/08/nyregion/questions-of-bias-are-raised-about-a-teachers-exam-in-new-york.html">here</a> in the <i>New York Times</i>, when a racial disparity exists in scores on a qualification test for employees, this is often is taken as <i>prima facie</i> evidence that the test is racially discriminatory and that it must be thrown out. A famous legal dispute arising from this practice was the 2009 Supreme Court case <a href="https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/cert/07-1428">Ricci v. DiStefano</a>. The NYT article quotes one expert (Kate Walsh) expressing concern that if these tests are no longer used for selecting school teachers, it will result in hiring teachers who are less qualified, and lowering the standard of teaching in public schools.

Recall that the three workplace meta-analyses cited in Hunt's textbook (<a href="https://www.deviantart.com/users/outgoing?http://emilkirkegaard.dk/da/wp-content/uploads/ETHNIC-GROUP-DIFFERENCES-IN-COGNITIVE-ABILITY-IN-EMPLOYMENT-AND-EDUCATIONAL-SETTINGS-A-META%E2%80%90ANALYSIS.pdf">Roth et al. 2001</a>, <a href="http://people.tamu.edu/~w-arthur/611/Journals/Roth,%20Huffcutt,%20&amp;%20Bobko%20(2003)%20JAP.pdf">Roth et al. 2003</a>, and <a href="http://www.people.vcu.edu/~mamcdani/Publications/McKay%20&amp;%20McDaniel%20(2006).pdf">McKay and McDaniel 2006</a>) found that racial gaps exist in both subjective and objective measures of job performance. This data suggests that when a racial disparity exists on a test intended to assess applicants' qualification for a job, that does not necessarily mean there is something wrong with the test. In order to determine whether any particular employment test is racially biased or not, someone would have to measure whether it predicts job performance equally well regardless of the race of the person taking it, similar to how this has been measured by the various studies about whether or not IQ tests are biased.

Having a racially diverse workforce can be a valuable goal in of itself, and psychology data can't determine how to weigh that goal against the goal of hiring employees who are as qualified as possible. However, psychology research can answer the question of whether these employment tests are racially biased or not, and it would be a good idea to know that for sure before throwing out the tests because of a racial disparity in their results. Making an informed decision is especially important in the area of selecting teachers, because in that case this decision affects the quality of children's education.</li>
<li>When groups have differing rates of success in the areas that IQ correlates with, this tends to produce resentment towards whichever group or groups are more successful. In the present, one of the best demonstrations of this principle is the <a href="http://edge.psu.edu/workshops/mc/power/privilegewalk.shtml">Privilege Walk</a>, an exercise that's used (with minor variations) in Whiteness Studies courses at colleges and universities across the United States. In the Privilege Walk, students are given instructions to step forward or backward to demonstrate the ways that they're unfairly advantaged or disadvantaged, with the goal of eventually separating the class by race and (to a lesser extent) by gender. The instructions <a href="http://www.gearup.wa.gov/sites/default/files/resources/privilege_walk.pdf">here</a> mention that the students are typically told there's a prize at the front of the room that everyone is competing for, which encourages them to feel emotionally invested in the results of the instructions they're given.

Some of these instructions are purely racial, such as "If your ancestors were forced to come to the USA not by choice, take one step back." But there also are some that concern the years of education a person has completed, such as "If your parents attended college take one step forward", or that concern differences in socio-economic status, such as "If you own a car take one step forward". As was mentioned earlier, socio-economic status and years of education both are variables to which the genetic contribution has been <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160289614000178">directly measured</a>, with genes accounting for a lower bound of 18% of variance in socio-economic status and a lower bound of 21% of the variance in years of education. (As in the case of IQ, this does not require between-group differences in these outcomes to have a genetic component, but it means that it's possible.) With respect to group differences specifically, Hunt's textbook (Pg. 420-421) concludes that the degree to which income is influenced by intelligence (as measured by the Armed Forces Qualification Test) is less than what was claimed in <i>The Bell Curve</i>, but that the relationship between intelligence and income is essentially the same regardless of race.

Even more than the cause of the gaps in test scores, the question of whether genes play a role in these outcome disparities is often treated as a question where only one answer can be morally right, and where we should act like we already know the answer without trying to investigate it. But these are empirical questions, that are not impossible to answer: the question of how much historical injustices such as slavery and segregation are affecting the educational and economic opportunities of people born in the 1980s or 1990s, and the question of whether the alleles that affect variation in these outcomes have the same frequency in all ethnic groups. If it turns out that the disparities in these areas are not caused primarily by discrimination, then blaming them on white racism is needlessly stirring up racial resentment.

It is a risky tactic to direct these sorts of accusations of racism against white people as a whole, rather than against specific individuals or organizations. The progressive left's antagonistic attitude towards white men (or towards whiteness in general), and the near-universality with which it accused that demographic group of racism and sexism, is widely-regarded as one of the factors that alienated white working-class voters from the Democratic party during the 2016 election. That point was made in <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/opinion/sunday/the-crisis-for-liberalism.html">this article</a> in the <i>New York Times</i> from November 2016, as well as several other articles published in various newspapers and magazines around the same time, including <a href="http://reason.com/blog/2016/11/09/trump-won-because-leftist-political-corr"><i>Reason</i></a>, <a href="http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/11/how-the-left-created-donald-trump-214472"><i>Politico</i></a>, and <a href="http://www.denverpost.com/2016/11/15/democrats-must-drop-identity-politics/">the <i>Denver Post</i></a>. More recently, Steve Bannon <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/08/18/steve-bannon-has-a-point-charges-of-racism-might-not-bring-down-trump/">has said</a> that he wants Democrats to focus on race and racism as much as possible, because it's a losing strategy and works to his advantage.

This isn't to say that racism and sexism don't still exist, or that society shouldn't try to eradicate them, but there are ways of pursuing that goal without violating the right of all people to be presumed innocent until proven guilty. When white people as a group are assumed to be guilty of creating a specific racial disparity, without any proof that the disparity is primarily caused by discrimination, that's a prime example of the sort of tactic that will encourage them to vote for Trump in 2020.</li></ol>
Finally, a more general point. Our work as science educators is actively opposed by people who claim that we do not really value scientific objectivity, and that we are pushing for wider acceptance of evolution and climate change only because we're advancing a political or anti-religious agenda. (See <a href="https://www.str.org/articles/who-really-is-closed-minded#.WYt9QP_yupc">this article</a> for an example of someone who I think really does believe this to be the case.) If we accept what the data shows only in areas where it's convenient for a secular liberal worldview, and ignore it in the areas where it's inconvenient, we will be proving these people right. Academics such as Sussman and Turkheimer have given a lot of ammunition to people who make this argument, and this is something that ought to be discouraged.

# Part 6: Three proposals for science educators

There is one important difference between the research covered in this article, and areas of research such as evolution and climate change. In the latter two cases, the answers to all of the major questions are pretty much settled, and whatever disagreement remains among most scientists is over the details. But in the fields of differential psychology and genetics, there is one major question that has not yet been answered: whether or not genes play a role in the racial performance gaps on IQ and other tests. This lack of an answer is borne out by how the topic is presented in major textbooks about differential psychology, and also by Heiner Rindermann's poll about the views of researchers in this area.

Until there is a clear answer to this question, I do not think science educators should take a strong position either way as to the cause of these group differences. However, there are many aspects of this topic about which a clear consensus exists: that IQ tests measure a real ability, that they are not racially biased, and that race correlates with genetic and biological traits. Rejecting the consensus in these areas is just as unscientific an attitude as rejecting it about evolution or climate change, and opposing this way of thinking should matter the same amount to science educators regardless of whether it's coming from the left or from the right.

Overall I hold the evolution education community in high regard, and I like to think that when science educators stress the importance of accepting what the data shows even if it conflicts with one's worldview, they really are serious about upholding that ideal. If they are, I have three proposals about how to go about doing so in this case.

<b>First</b>, we should try to communicate the research in this area to the general public. In particular, research into the genetic basis of human intelligence is a field that's progressing rapidly, with a new major study about it published every few months. A few public intellectuals such as Steven Pinker cover this research regularly, but most science educators mention it rarely or never, and a large portion of the public is unaware of it. For science educators who want to cover intelligence research, one way to follow new developments is by following the editorial board members of the journal <i>Intelligence</i> who are <a href="https://twitter.com/KirkegaardEmil/lists/intelligence-editorial/members">active on Twitter</a>, many of whom regularly post about new research in this field. <a href="https://twitter.com/rjhaier">Richard Haier</a> is especially worth following, because he is currently the <a href="https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160289617303173">editor-in-chief of the journal <i>Intelligence</i></a>, and arguably the most prominent living intelligence researcher in the world.

A related way to fight public ignorance in this area is by encouraging universities to cover intelligence research in undergraduate-level psychology courses. According to <a href="https://www.nature.com/news/intelligence-research-should-not-be-held-back-by-its-past-1.22021">this article</a>, many universities have recently dropped the topic from their curriculums because it makes students and school administrators uncomfortable. Whenever public schools have dropped evolution from their biology curriculums because it offends creationists, science educators have done everything they could to ensure it would eventually be added back, and we should apply the same standard for intelligence research as well.

<b>Second</b>, science educators should take a stand against Liberal Creationist academics and activists who think the way to stop racism is by using the tactics I've discussed in this article: by arguing that judgments about a hypothesis should be based on its political or moral implications, by misrepresenting sources, or by advancing claims about psychology or genetics that these fields overwhelmingly reject as false. Thanks to the work of science educators, Young-Earth Creationist arguments have not been able to gain much of a foothold in academia or public policy, but in the absence of any similarly organized effort to oppose Liberal Creationism, its claims and practices have been allowed to spread much more widely with very little opposition. If organizations such as the NCSE could take the same sort of stand against Liberal Creationism that they have against young-Earth creationism and climate change denial, it should be possible to curtail Liberal Creationism's reach and influence in a similar way.

In addition to its encouragement of scientific ignorance, Liberal Creationism does not appear to even be accomplishing its stated goal of improving race relations. Reading Sussman's book and the reviews of it in 2018, it's difficult to avoid the impression that it was hopelessly naive to conclude that by using these tactics "the good guys have been winning". None of these tactics stopped the rise of the alt-right, nor did they stop the election of a president who doesn't want to unequivocally condemn white supremacism. If anything, these tactics have been a rallying point for the alt-right, and a basis for them to argue that they are the ones who really understand the world and that the rest of society doesn't want to face reality.

If we are serious about trying to stop white supremacists' misuse of intelligence research, I think that a new approach is needed. Instead of trying to suppress this research or pretending that it doesn’t exist, a strategy with a greater chance of success would be to start discussing it openly, while explaining how none of the discoveries in this area can justify treating people differently based on their race, just as we've previously helped society understand that accepting evolution doesn't justify Social Darwinism. This is both a moral point and an empirical one: as demonstrated by the graph in this article's second section, every race contains individuals at every point on the IQ spectrum, so a person's race is one of the <i>least</i> reliable ways of trying to guess what their IQ is.

<b>Third</b>, something that needs to change is for science educators to stop regarding it as a "conservative" viewpoint to accept that race correlates with biological traits and that IQ is a meaningful measure. It's only a conservative viewpoint in the same way that acknowledging the benefit of childhood vaccines is a conservative viewpoint, or that accepting the science of evolution and climate change is a liberal viewpoint. Because of how science has become politicized over the past few decades, it's become a widespread belief among both conservatives and liberals that there is a "party line" on scientific topics—that you must reject climate change if you're a conservative, or that you must reject certain aspects of genetics and differential psychology if you're a liberal. Likewise, it's common to assume that anyone arguing for the science of evolution or climate change must be a liberal, or that anyone arguing for the data presented in this article must be a conservative. If that were true, what would it say of me, who has written this article after spending nine years writing a book that's a defense of the "liberal" science of evolution?

I was raised as an evangelical Protestant, in an intellectual community where a person's willingness to accept evolutionary science was an accurate proxy of their open-mindedness in general. Consequently, acceptance of evolution was very important to me, and it still is. But now that I'm no longer religious, I've realized that among non-religious people there is a much more significant proxy for a person's rationality and open-mindedness: their willingness to accept whatever the data indicates from the fields of genetics and differential psychology, regardless of how troubling they might find it politically. There is more to a scientific worldview than paying lip service to the concept of rationality, while holding whatever is the most popular set of beliefs and rejecting all others. Thomas Huxley, possibly the greatest science communicator of all time, explained what it truly involves:
<blockquote>Sit down before fact as a little child, be prepared to give up every preconceived notion, follow humbly wherever and to whatever abysses nature leads, or you shall learn nothing.</blockquote>
Can modern science educators uphold the principle described by Huxley, and follow the evidence wherever it leads while expecting others to do the same? Or will we continue to accept the current practice of judging scientific hypotheses based on whether they offend our ethical intuition, despite the harm this has done and will continue to do? The choice is on us, and the rest of the world is watching.

<hr />
<small><b>1</b><a name="Pinker" href="#1">^</a> With respect to the claim about IQ, Steven Pinker explains this rebuttal in more detail in chapter 8 of <i>The Blank Slate</i>.

<b>2</b><a name="Xfactor" href="#2">^</a> In this context, "heritable" refers to heritability within an ethnic group, because between-group heritability can't be measured directly. While it's widely-accepted in behavioral genetics that genes account for most of the variance in general intelligence among adults of the same race, this does not require the differences between group averages to also have a genetic component.

For an explanation of how it's possible for the variation within two groups to be mostly genetic, while the difference between the two groups is entirely environmental, consider this famous thought experiment. Take two handfuls of corn from the same bag, plant one in a nutrient-rich environment, and plant the other in a nutrient-poor environment. Within each of these two environments, the variation in height among corn stalks will be mostly genetic, but the difference in average height between the two groups will be entirely environmental. For intelligence or any other trait, this sort of environmental factor that varies between two groups, but is uniform within each of the groups, is known as an "X-factor".

For an environmental factor (or collection of factors) to qualify as an X-factor, its presence or absence within each of the two groups must be completely uniform. Continuing with the corn analogy, if the quality of nutrients varied significantly within each of the two environments, then it would also contribute to the variation in height within each population, and thus lower the within-group heritability of height. This principle is why most of the environmental factors that are commonly discussed in the context of race and IQ don't actually qualify as X-factors. For example, there is a difference in average quality of education between races in the United States, but quality of education also varies a great deal among individuals within each race. If quality of education were the cause of racial IQ gaps, then it should also cause a large amount of IQ variation among individuals within each race, and the within-group heritability of IQ would be much lower than it actually is.

Psychologists generally regard it as possible that the cause of racial IQ gaps could be entirely environmental, but the requirement for any environmental cause to be an X-factor is the biggest reason why there is no <i>specific</i> environmental factor that's widely-accepted as a likely explanation. Although it's a fairly old book, in my opinion the best explanation of this principle is in James Flynn's 1980 book <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=KaY9AAAAIAAJ"><i>Race, IQ and Jensen</i></a>, which discusses it on pages 54-63. My own explanation here is a paraphrase of Flynn's, but he explains it better than I could.

<b>3</b><a name="Spearman" href="#3">^</a> The 2015 paper cited here is a follow-up to an <a href="https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/behavioral-and-brain-sciences/article/nature-of-the-blackwhite-difference-on-various-psychometric-tests-spearmans-hypothesis/1CF219600DA3AE95D2AEF686C358D0E9">1985 study</a> that reported a similar correlation, which is cited in the Njenhuis and van der Flier paper. The 1985 study used a statistical technique known as the method of correlated vectors, but this technique was eventually found to be capable of generating false positives, so for many years the conclusions of the 1985 paper were controversial. The 2015 study is an updated analysis using a more robust statistical method to demonstrate the same correlation.

<b>4</b><a name="Winegard" href="#4">^</a> See <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Brian_Boutwell/publication/312500015_Human_Biological_and_Psychological_Diversity/links/5919d4cb4585159b1a4ba2a9/Human-Biological-and-Psychological-Diversity.pdf">Winegard at al. 2017</a> for a more detailed explanation of how races could potentially differ in the distribution of psychological traits, along with a discussion of some of the counter-arguments against this possibility. For an example of the type of study that could be done to test for a genetic component to IQ gaps, see <a href="https://media.8ch.net/pdfs/src/1441332656918.pdf">Piffer 2015</a>. The statistical method used by Piffer's study is not widely-accepted, but its overall approach is likely to be used by other studies in the future: directly measuring how ethnic groups vary in the distribution of alleles known to affect cognitive ability, and comparing that to the distribution of IQ scores.

<b>5</b><a name="Davis" href="#5">^</a> Many of the articles arguing for this perspective (including the one quoted here) support their argument by bringing up historical cases where scientists tested their theories using unethical experiments, such as the Tuskegee syphilis experiment or the Little Albert experiment. It is certainly true that ethical concerns apply to the <i>methods</i> used by scientists, and the methods of these particular experiments were unethical. But this is not the same as applying the standards of ethics and politics to scientific <i>conclusions</i>, which are attempts to understand the world as accurately as possible based on data that's already been collected. This distinction is explained in <a href="https://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v272/n5652/pdf/272390a0.pdf">Bernard Davis' article from <i>Nature</i></a>, using medical research as an analogy:

<i>Medical investigators do indeed accept ethical limitations on dangerous procedures, that is, those that would expose an experimental subject to loss of dignity, pain, or risk. And investigators in behavioural genetics are subject to analogous limitations: they cannot mate humans at will, or transfer identical twins into different homes, even though these procedures would be powerful tools for advancing knowledge. On the other hand, medical investigators are not forbidden to seek knowledge simply because it may be painful, in its prognostic implications, for the subject or for others.</i></small>
