---
title: 'Tree?  What tree?'
date: 2026-03-13 12:00:01 -08:00
author: Joe Felsenstein
---

Max Telford, who is Professor in the Department of 
Genetics, Evolution, and Environment at University 
College, London, has written an engaging book, 
*The Tree of Life: Solving Science’s Greatest Puzzle", 
which has stirred up reactions at the Discovery Institute 
site Science And Culture Today. (I have not yet read 
Telford's book, except to find a passage where he mentions 
me, saying that when he attended a lecture by me years ago he found 
me terrifying.  Sorry about that.)

The conclusion that there is a treelike genealogy of life is about
250 years old, gaining acceptance even before Darwin's work.
It is central to modern biology.

But this is not the impression you'd get if all you read 
was the Discovery Institute's website Science and Culture 
Today.  Instead you'd find Emily Reeves, who describes herself 
as "a biochemist, metabolic nutritionist, and aspiring systems biologist" 
questioning the conclusion that there is such a genealogy, 
in two posts responding to Telford's book.  And even before 
that, posts by Rob Stadler, an engineer, concluded that 
the evidence from homology did not suppoer the conclusion 
that it came from common ancestry.

What is particularly interesting is that this seems to 
signal the Discovery Institute's shifting from arguing that 
Intelligent Design is detectable in evolution, to arguing 
that common ancestry is not detectable.

<!--more-->


