---
layout: article
title: SUCKERED
date: '2007-04-01 09:17:07 -0700'
author: Guest Contributor
mt_id: 2928
blog_id: 2
post_id: 2928
basename: suckered
---
OK, well, we have to admit it, this time our adversaries at the Discovery Institute completely fooled us.  For several weeks many of us have been involved in a back-and-forth with Michael Egnor, a neurosurgeon at Stony Brook who, ironically, displayed an amazingly thick skull about anything concerning evolutionary biology.  Not only did he deny the obvious facts of evolution and its importance for medicine and biology, but he kept contradicting himself, repeating empty statements, ignoring the evidence and demanding answers to questions which had been already answered many times over.  It was maddening to think that a person with a high-level degree and an academic position in a major educational and research institution could be such a know-nothing fool.

Well, he isn't, apparently.  It was all a ruse by ID advocates to see how far they could pull our chain, and lead us to take his progressively more outlandish statements for real.  [The Discovery Institute Media Complaint Division site has now come clean](http://www.evolutionnews.net/2007/04/april_fools.html#entry-070401), admitting to the prank and giving us a well-deserved raspberry.  We should have known better: imagine having a guy who denies the obvious homology of our neural system to that of other vertebrates in charge of slicing off chunks of it in an operating room!  Or someone who doesn't believe bacteria _evolve_ resistance to antibiotics dealing with the risk of post-operatory infections.  

While we are ashamed to have fallen for such a crass caricature of a "dumb Creationist", and apologize to our readers for the time wasted in countering his ludicrous arguments, we applaud the cleverness of the ID folks involved in this April Fool's joke and their effortless impersonation of such a character.

How stupid of us not to have thought of that!

The PT Crew

# April 2nd Update:

The above post is part of our April Fools' prank on you, our readers.  The Discovery Institute did not admit that Egnor was pranking us.  That faux page was part of our ruse.  Read all the comments in this thread to see who fell for it and who didn't.  Also check out [this post](http://www.pandasthumb.org/archives/2007/04/doubletake.html), where we come clean.
