---
layout: article
title: 99.9% Wrong
date: '2011-05-26 14:15:05 -0700'
author: Guest Contributor
mt_id: 4971
blog_id: 2
post_id: 4971
basename: 999_wrong
---
**by Joe Felsenstein,<br />[http&#58;//evolution.gs.washington.edu/felsenstein.html](http://evolution.gs.washington.edu/felsenstein.html)**

Over at Uncommon Descent, "niwrad" is back with [more calculations](http://www.uncommondescent.com/intelligent-design/a-statistical-comparison-of-two-human-genomes/#more-20700) showing that conventional figures for comparing sequences of genomes are all wrong.  Last time "niwrad" [showed that](http://www.uncommondescent.com/intelligent-design/a-simple-statistical-test-for-the-alleged-99-genetic-identity-between-humans-and-chimps/) humans and chimp genomes match only about 62% of the time.  The usual figure given is 98.77%.   Niwrad did this by taking 30-base chunks of one genome, finding the best match in the other genome, and then asking what fraction of the time there was a perfect match of all 30 bases.  That's where the 62% figure comes from.  I immediately [pointed out here at PT](http://pandasthumb.org/archives/2010/09/9877-wrong.html) that this was expected and did not represent some insightful new way of calculating these figures.

Now Niwrad has turned to comparing two human genomes.  The figure for 30-base perfect matches is about 96%.  The conventional figure is about 99.9%.  Let's see what is expected.  If a single base position has a 0.999 probability of matching, two bases have a 0.999x0.999 probability, three bases a 0.999x0.999x0.999 probability.   30 bases then have a probability that is 0.999 raised to the 30th power.   Which turns out to be (ta-da!) 0.97.  Not a bad fit.

Niwrad proudly notes that in the previous discussion


> it seemed to me that the general feeling at the end was that my statistical method for performing genome-wide comparisons might have some merit, after all.


(Niwrad must have missed the discussion over here).

It does have merit: It's a way of taking a  close match and making it sound much less close -- without changing anything.  I have a suggestion: why not try 100-base chunks?   That way human/chimp match will drop to only about 29%, while human/human will drop to 90%.   Or how about 1000-base chunks?  (human/chimp would be only about 0.00042 of a percent, and human/human would be down to about 37%).   Where will this all end?
