---
layout: article
title: Can Courts Rule on The Nature of Science?
date: '2005-10-06 11:49:31 -0700'
author: Timothy Sandefur
mt_id: 1479
blog_id: 2
post_id: 1479
basename: can_courts_rule
published: false
---
A complicated question has arisen in <a href="http://www.pandasthumb.org/archives/2005/10/the_pseudo-scie.html#comment-51107">the</a> <a href="http://www.pandasthumb.org/archives/2005/10/the_pseudo-scie.html#comment-51211">comments</a> to <a href="http://www.pandasthumb.org/archives/2005/10/the_pseudo-scie.html">my post below</a> about the <em>Dover </em>amicus brief. The amici argue that courts are not equipped to determine the nature of science...or at least, they seem to make that argument, just before going on to argue that the court should find that ID creationism is science. But are courts incapable of ruling on the nature of science? 

<!--more-->

That's not the same thing as asking whether a court can rule on the truth or falsehood of a particular scientific (or pseudoscientific) assertion. In at least some cases, the answer to the latter question is yes: courts are in the business of determining whether assertions about reality are in fact true or not, and courts have ruled---validly, I believe---that, for example, vaccination is, in fact, a worthwhile precaution against illness, <em>see <a href="http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=197&page=11#31">Jacobson v. Massachusetts, </em>197 U.S. 11, 30-31 (1905).</a> The whole business of a court is to determine whether an incident really did, or could, occur, and that means relying on evidence about reality, and there is simply no better evidence about reality than science. So yes, a court can, at least in many cases, determine whether a scientific assertion is, in fact, true.

But can a court decide whether a particular "way of thinking" or a particular theory is scientific? That is a little bit more complicated, but again, I think the answer is yes. How do we know what science is? One way would be to ask scientists what it is that they do, and then determine whether those things are being done in a particular situation. Scientists run experiments; so, are experiments being run by the plaintiff? If not, that's strong evidence that the plaintiff is not engaged in science. 

There's a big exception to the courts' ability to assess the truth or falsehood of assertions about the universe. That is, cases in which the assertions are religious in nature. The famous case on this is <em><a href="http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=322&page=78">United States v. Ballard, </em>322 U.S. 78 (1944),</a> in which the defendants were charged with fraud for running a faith-healing scheme. The Supreme Court decided that, while the state can prosecute people who run a fraud scheme on the basis of religious assertions that they do not themselves actually believe, the First Amendment forbids a court from inquiring into the truth or falsehood of those assertions. If a person believes that faith healing works, you can't prosecute that person for fraud on the grounds that, in reality, faith healing has no actual basis---even though that is, in fact, the case. The reason is that if a court were to make that inquiry, and declare that faith healing is not, in fact, possible, that would violate the Free Exercise Clause. <strong>"'The law knows no heresy, and is committed to the support of no dogma, the establishment of no sect,'" </strong>wrote William O. Douglas.  <blockquote><strong>The First Amendment has a dual aspect. It not only "forestalls compulsion by law of the acceptance of any creed or the practice of any form of worship" but also "safeguards the free exercise of the chosen form of religion...." Freedom of thought...embraces the right to maintain theories of life and of death and of the hereafter which are rank heresy to followers of the orthodox faiths.... Men may believe what they cannot prove. They may not be put to the proof of their religious doctrines or beliefs. Religious experiences which are as real as life to some may be incomprehensible to others. Yet the fact that they may be beyond the ken of mortals does not mean that they can be made suspect before the law. Many take their gospel from the New Testament. But it would hardly be supposed that they could be tried before a jury charged with the duty of determining whether those teachings contained false representations. The miracles of the New Testament, the Divinity of Christ, life after death, the power of prayer are deep in the religious convictions of many. If one could be sent to jail because a jury in a hostile environment found those teachings false, little indeed would be left of religious freedom. </strong></blockquote>

<em><a href="http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=322&page=78#87">Id. </em>at 86-87</a> (citations omitted). However, Douglas continued, courts could inquire into whether people propagating religiously-based frauds actually believe their assertions. If they don't, then an action for fraud might be allowed.

In dissent, Justice Robert Jackson, joined by three others, declared that there was <strong>"nothing but humbug, untained by any trace of truth," </strong>in the things that the faith healers said, <em><a href="http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=322&page=78#92">id.</em> at 92.</a> But he and the other dissenters agreed that a court could not rule on the truth or falsehood of a religiously-backed assertion. What he objected to was the idea of inquiring into the sincerity of the person making the assertion. Jackson could <strong>"not see how we can separate an issue as to what is believed from considerations as to what is believable. The most convincing proof that one believes his statements is to show that they have been true in his experience. Likewise, that one knowingly falsified is best proved by showing that what he said happened never did happen. How can the Government prove these persons knew something to be false which it cannot prove to be false? If we try religious sincerity severed from religious verity, we isolate the dispute from the very considerations which in common experience provide its most reliable answer."</strong> <em><a href="http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=322&page=78#93">Id.</em> at 92-93.</a> But this was just what the First Amendment would not allow, Jackson wrote. In other words, the Court was <em>unanimous </em>in <em>Ballard </em>on one issue: the Constitution doesn't allow a court to examine whether a religious assertion is actually true or not.

What's important about <em>Ballard</em>, for our purposes, is that the decision draws a line between religious and scientific assertions. If you say that X happened because, well, there's all this DNA evidence and ballistics evidence and eyewitness testimony and the common experience of mankind and so forth, the court can rule on the truth or falsehood of that theory: perhaps the DNA evidence was tainted, the ballistics test unconvincing, or what have you. But if you say that X happened because God made it happen---that is something a court is not allowed to rule on at all. That may be unfair, but that's the First Amendment. To distinguish between these two categories, however, obviously requires a court to determine what is science and what is religion.

It's hard, certainly, to determine what a religion is. Courts have struggled with it for a long time. See, e.g., James M. Donovan, <em>God Is As God Does: Law, Anthropology, And The Definition of "Religion," </em>6 Seton Hall Const. L.J. 23 (1995); Note, <em>Toward a Constitutional Definition of Religion, </em>91 Harv. L. Rev. 1056 (1978). But it must be possible if the law is going to maintain this distinction, or even to operate under the First Amendment at all. And if it is possible to define religion---or dentistry, or economics, or molecular biology---then it must be possible to define science. That's just what the Supreme Court tried to do in <em><a href="http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=509&page=579">Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals,</em> 509 U.S. 579 (1993).</a> In that decision---written by Harry Blackmun, who, with a college degree in mathematics, was probably the closest thing to a scientist the modern Supreme Court has seen---the Court found that science (1) produces testable theories, (2) is subject to the peer review process, (3) produces reliable results, and (4) produces ideas that are generally accepted in the scientific community. <a href="http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=509&page=579#594"><em>Id. </em>at 593-94.</a> Again, pretty vague, but better than nothing. 

There seems, therefore, not only to be no reason courts can't determine what the nature of science is, but that they've done at least a decent job at starting that inquiry---and that doing so is absolutely indispensable to the work they do.
