---
layout: article
title: Alas, Texas
date: '2006-01-06 10:25:57 -0700'
author: PZ Myers
mt_id: 1806
blog_id: 2
post_id: 1806
basename: alas_texas_1
---
<p>Kansans will be relieved to learn that their big buddy to the South, Texas, is going to take some of the heat off of them. We have a [new target for ridicule](http://jlbgibberish.blogspot.com/2006/01/governor-rick-perry-has-gone-bugfuck.html):</p>

> <p>Gov. Rick Perry, a Republican who has made outreach to Christian conservatives a theme of his gubernatorial portfolio, thinks Texas public school students should be taught intelligent design along with evolutionary theory, his office said Thursday.</p>
> 
> <p>&hellip;</p>
> 
> <p>Perry "supports the teaching of the theory of intelligent design," spokeswoman Kathy Walt said. "Texas schools teach the theory of evolution; intelligent design is a valid scientific theory, and he believes it should be taught as well."</p>

<p>The article does go on to mention that the chairperson of the State Board of Education, in a how-the-hell-did-this-kook-get-to-be-my-boss moment, pointed out that the educators of the state have had no intention of introducing a non-issue like ID into the curriculum.</p>

<p>I look forward to hearing the Discovery Institute's reaction. Will they repudiate their current strategy of pretending they don't want to teach ID in schools and embrace the propaganda opportunity, or will they let Perry twist in the wind? Will the Thomas More Law Center, fresh off their masochistic adventure in Dover, step forward with joy in their hearts and beg, "yes, whip me again, please"? Will the voters of Texas finally realize that even idiots can wear a cowboy hat and boots?</p>
