---
layout: article
title: " Kansas USD 383: 38 Nobel laureates"
date: '2006-03-01 02:55:30 -0700'
author: PvM
mt_id: 1991
blog_id: 2
post_id: 1991
basename: _kansas_usd_383
---
HHMI HOWARD HUGHES MEDICAL INSTITUTE
January 27,2006

USD 383 Board of Education
Manhattan-Ogden Public School District
Robinson Education Center
203 1 Poyntz Avenue
Manhattan, KS 66502

Dear Board Members:

> In September 2005 I and 38 other Nobel Laureates wrote the Kansas State Board of Education in defense of science and education. We urged the Board to reject proposed science standards that were to include alternatives to evolution as explanations for the origin of species. I was disappointed that the Board voted to adopt the proposed standards on November 8,2005. As we stated then, evolution is not a theory, as the term "theory of evolution" seems to indicate, but rather is based upon compelling scientific evidence and is the foundation of much of modern biology. The standards adopted by the Board redefined science in a way that I believe will harm the education of students in Kansas as they try to understand the world in which they live and compete with the world's workforce.
> 
> I applaud the current effort by the science faculty of the Kansas State University not to allow science to be redefined, at least in Manhattan. I urge you to support their resolution not to support the new Kansas Science Standards. In supporting the KSU faculty you would show great leadership and ensure that the students in your district will continue to have a strong science education. You also would be joining the large number of scientific and educational organizations that support rigorous science education.

H. Robert Horvitz Ph.D.
Professor of Biology, MIT
2002 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine

THE ELIE WIESEL FOUNDATION FOR HUMANITY NOBEL LAUREATES INITIATIVE
September 9,2005

TO: Kansas State Board of Education

> We, Nobel Laureates, are writing in defense of science. We reject efforts by the proponents of so-called "intelligent design" to politicize scientific inquiry and urge the Kansas State Board of Education to maintain Darwinian evolution as the sole curriculum and science standard in the State of Kansas.
> 
> The United States has come a long way since John T. Scopes was convicted for teaching the theory of evolution 80 years ago. We are, therefore, troubled that Darwinism was described as "dangerous dogma" at one of your hearings. We are also concerned by the Board's recommendation of August 8, 2005 to allow standards that include greater criticism of evolution.
> 
> Logically derived from confirmable evidence, evolution is understood to be the result of an unguided, unplanned process of random variation and natural selection. As the foundation of modem biology, its indispensable role has been further strengthened by the capacity to study DNA. In contrast, intelligent design is fundamentally unscientific; it cannot be tested as scientific theory because its central conclusion is based on belief in the intervention of a supernatural agent.
> 
> Differences exist between scientific and spiritual world views, but there is no need to blur the distinction between the two. Nor is there need for conflict between the theory of evolution and religious faith. Science and faith are not mutually exclusive. Neither should feel threatened by the other.
> 
> When it meets in October, 2005, we urge the Kansas State Board of Education to vote against the latest draft of standards, which propose including intelligent design in academic curriculum.

Sincerely,

Alexei A. Abrikosov
Nobel Prize, Physics (2003)

Richard Axel
Nobel Prize, Medicine (2004)

Gunter Blobel
Nobel Prize, Medicine (1999)

Linda B. Buck
Nobel Prize, Medicine (2004)

Aaron Ciechanover
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (2004)

Mairead Conigan Maguire
Nobel Prize, Peace (1976)

Robert F. Curl, Jr.
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (1996)

John B. Fenn
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (2002)

Clive W.J. Granger
Nobel Prize, Economics (2003)

David J. Gross
Nobel Prize, Physics (2004)

Leland H. Hartwell
Nobel Prize, Medicine (2001)

Herbert A. Hauptman
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (1985)

Dudley R. Herschbach
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (1986)

Avram Hershko
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (2004)

Roald Hoffmann
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (198 1)

H. Robert Horvitz
Nobel Prize, Medicine (2002)

Eric R. Kandel
Nobel Prize, Medicine (2000)

Wolfgang Ketterle
Nobel Prize, Physics (2001)

Aaron Klug
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (1982)

Sir Harold Kroto
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (1996)

Anthony J. Leggett
Nobel Prize, Physics (2003)

Jean-Marie Lehn
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (1987)

Ferid Murad
Nobel Prize, Medicine (1998)

Erwin Neher
Nobel Prize, Medicine (1991)

Sir Paul Nurse
Nobel Prize, Medicine (2001)

Stanley B. Prusiner
Nobel Prize, Medicine (1997)

Irwin Rose
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (2004)

K. Barry Sharpless
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (2001)

Horst L. St6rmer
Nobel Prize, Physics (1998)

Gerardus 't Hooft
Nobel Prize, Physics (1999)

Daniel C. Tsui
Nobel Prize, Physics (1998)

Harold E. Varmus
Nobel Prize, Medicine (1989)

John E. Walker
Nobel Prize, Chemistry (1997)

Carl E. Wieman
Nobel Prize, Physics (2001)

Elie Wiesel
Nobel Prize, Peace (1986)

Frank Wilczek
Nobel Prize, Physics (2004)

Jody Williams
Nobel Prize, Peace (1997)

Betty Williams
Nobel Prize, Peace (1976)
