---
layout: article
title: 'Kansas USD 383:  Board of Directors of the Kansas Association of Teachers
  of Science'
date: '2006-03-01 02:51:34 -0700'
author: PvM
mt_id: 1990
blog_id: 2
post_id: 1990
basename: kansas_usd_383
---
Provided by Keith Miller

HAYS, KS -- In response to the Kansas State Board of Education, the Board of Directors of the Kansas Association of Teachers of Science has released a position statement on the State Board of Education's Science Standards 2005. In a cover letter for the response, KATS Board of Directors President David Pollock said, "The Kansas Association of Teachers of Science (KATS) is the largest science teacher association in the state of Kansas. The 18 elected board members represent elementary through college teachers. The following is the official position of KATS that was passed at the regularly scheduled board meeting January 21,2006."

Pollock is a teacher at Hays High School, Hays USD 489.

Kansas Association of Teachers of Science response to the Kansas State Board of Education adoption of the 2005 Science Standards:

> The Kansas Association of Teachers of Science (KATS) is committed to promoting quality science teaching and the scientific literacy of both students and citizens throughout the state of Kansas. Accordingly, the KATS Board of Directors rejects on both scientific and pedagogical grounds the 2005 State Science Standards approved by the Kansas State Board of Education (KSBE). The 2005 Standards neither promote quality teaching nor the development of scientific literacy.
> 
> As the state-level affiliate of the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA), KATS is the largest organization in Kansas representing teachers of science. We offer our unhesitating support to teachers who continue to emphasize science teaching that parallels contemporary scientific understanding as it is practiced throughout the world as a search for natural causes.
> 
> By redefining science in the Kansas Science Education Standards, the KSBE is promoting intelligent design tenets that purport supernatural explanations as valid scientific theories. Given that the goal of the intelligent design movement includes replacing scientific explanations with theistic understanding and to see this design theory inappropriately imposed on our religious, cultural, moral, and political life, the KATS Board of Directors adamantly opposes turning Kansas science classrooms into theatres of political and religious turmoil blurring the Constitutional ideals of separation of Church and State.
> 
> Therefore, KATS resolves that:
> 
> --Kansas teachers of science should continue to teach science as it is practiced throughout the world, and not attribute natural phenomena to supernatural causation;
> 
> --Kansas teachers of science should explore with their students the extensive evidence for evolutionary theory and actively refute the so-called evidence against evolution, as outlined in the new science standards ;
> 
> --The Kansas Association of Teachers of Science recognizes that the KSBE is exhibiting educational irresponsibility in ignoring mainstream scientific understandings by substituting its own religiously motivated agenda;
> 
> --State assessments should not include items related to the disputed portions of the 2005 Standards, as these statements do not reflect the global view of the science community;
> 
> --The KSBE should reconsider the inclusion of non-scientific ideas about the origins and development of life in order not to damage the prospects for student admission to high-quality colleges and universities;
> 
> --The KSBE should be aware that their anti-science actions are in direct conflict with the recent Kansas Bioscience Initiative.
> 
> Be it further resolved, that the Board of Directors of the Kansas Association of Teachers of Science (KATS) does not support and disassociates itself fi-om these Kansas Science Education Standards (2005) as approved by the Kansas State Board of Education and recommends continued use of the 2001 Standards for curriculum development and assessment.
> 
> Signed
> The Board of Directors of the Kansas Association of Teachers of Science
> President
> David Pollock
