---
layout: article
title: Bad Philip Johnson Quote
date: '2006-02-11 15:43:20 -0700'
author: Ed Brayton
mt_id: 1918
blog_id: 2
post_id: 1918
basename: post_4
---
There is a quote that I've seen all over the place, and I believe even used myself over the years, from the founder of the ID movement, Philip Johnson. Here is the quote as it is usually given:

> "The objective is to convince people that Darwinism is inherently atheistic, thus shifting the debate from creationism vs. evolution to the existence of God vs. the non-existence of God. From there people are introduced to 'the truth' of the Bible and then 'the question of sin' and finally 'introduced to Jesus.'"

The quote appears on over 400 webpages according to Google, and the source cited is the April 1999 edition of _Church and State_ magazine. That magazine is published by Americans United for Separation of Church and State and this article was written by Rob Boston. The problem is that this is not a quote from Philip Johnson, it's a quote _about_ Philip Johnson, and as it has gotten passed around it has often been attributed to Johnson himself. For the full text of the article, go [here](http://web.archive.org/web/20010508032051/http://www.au.org/churchstate/cs4995.htm). Given how often we have criticized the creationists about inaccurate and out of context quotations, it is imperative that we avoid using this quotation ourselves.

**Update**: This is a good example, I think, of how our side handles such situations compared to the other side. I emailed Michael Shermer, the editor of Skeptic, last night because he had recently used the quote in an article, and I informed him that it was a paraphrase, not a quote. His immediate response was to say thank you for the correction and to call his publisher because the quote also appears in his forthcoming book and he wanted to make sure it got taken out so it wouldn't get disseminated any further. Kudos to Shermer.
