---
title: 'Should T.H. Huxley be honored? Part 2'
date: '2022-08-08 12:00:00 -06:00'
author: Joe Felsenstein and Matt Young
---

The <a href="https://pandasthumb.org/archives/2021/05/canceling-huxley">plan to rename Huxley College of the Environment</a> at Western Washington University may be gathering steam. As we noted in our earlier article, this plan seems to be an exercise in <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Presentism_(literary_and_historical_analysis)"><em>presentism</em></a>, by which we mean applying the moral and ethical standards of today to historical figures as if they were aware of them. Less delicately, you might say that presentism is using (or misusing) the moral and ethical standards of today to condemn  historical figures and dismiss their achievements.

The earlier PT article cited above gives the background to the current controversy. Since that article was published, however, the <a href="https://president.wwu.edu/files/2021-07/LRTF%20Report%20and%20Recommendations_June%202021.pdf">Legacy Review Task Force sent its report</a> to the president, Sabah Randhawa. The president's cover letter, which we obtained from a faculty member, is noncommittal.

The Summary section of the report says of Huxley,

<!--more-->

<blockquote>First, the Task Force unanimously recommends that the Board of Trustees remove T.H. Huxley’s name from the College the Environment. T.H. Huxley accomplished a great deal as a scholar during his lifetime. Unfortunately, his ethnological accomplishments were grounded in white supremacist values that dehumanize and harm many members of the Western community. The Task Force concluded that his legacy conflicts with the university’s current mission.</blockquote>

Statements by historians of science and others concerning Huxley's work and views have been made available by the President of WWU at [**a resources webpage**](https://president.wwu.edu/research-and-resources).  We call attention to the contrast between the views of Nicolaas Rupke and
Paul White.  Also to the article in WWU's [*AS Review*](https://asreview.org/2021/01/22/thomas-huxley-once-respected-now-rejected/) which objected to using Huxley's name.

A group of faculty at Huxley, with help from several of us on the outside, are organizing to oppose the name change. One such faculty member has asked us, in effect, to crowd-source their response. We also are open to hearing that we should not be taking this position, particularly of you can say why.  Thus, the following questions, which you may respond to in the comments:

<ol><li>Does the report propagate untruths about Huxley?</li>
<li>Most English intellectual figures of Huxley's time probably favored what today we would call racism, imperialism, sexism, and oppression of working people. Although slavery was abolished in England in 1833, England nevertheless supported the Confederacy during the American Civil War. Did Huxley, who was an abolitionist and a fervent advocate of making education available to all, favor or oppose these evils? Was he unusual in that regard? </li>
<li>Does the Huxley section of the report accept creationist myths about the relationship between evolutionary biology and racism? Specifically, what are those myths? How do they relate to Huxley? </li>
<li>Can anyone point out additional materials or resources that should be taken into account?</li>
<li>Should anything anywhere be named after any major intellectual of the 1800s?  the 1990s?</li>
</ol>

Whereas a name is only symbolic, we consider the matter to be of some importance, if only because we do not want to give in to demands based on unfounded allegations, or allegations that dismiss all the positive achievements associated with that name. If an influential scholar such as Huxley can be condemned, who is next? Should Western Washington University have "Washington" in its name? He did, of course, enslave people.  If we are impressed by the scientific work of someone, are we  trying to cover up unpleasant facts about their other views? Let's hear from you.

