---
layout: article
title: Here's the Real Proof that Evolution is Wrong???
date: '2004-04-02 23:44:20 -0700'
author: Reed A. Cartwright
mt_id: 85
blog_id: 2
post_id: 85
basename: heres_the_real
---
<p>A creationist has graced our little blog with a <a href="http://www.pandasthumb.org/pt-archives/000054.html#588">long rant</a> on how evolution is wrong.  The comment is  mostly <a href="http://www.cornerstonechurchonline.com/biblestu.htm">plagairized material</a>.  (Why are cut-and-pastes so popular with creationists?  Can they not take the time to do their own work or critically evaluate the work of others?)  The "arguments" and "facts" were the same ole, repetitive creationist shtick that we've seen so often before.  In fact claims like these are so popular that Mark Issak has worked up an entire <a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/list.html">index of creationist claims</a> for the <a href="http://www.talkorigins.org">talkorigins archive</a>.  It is a very useful resource, and I use it to respond to our friend's "points."   Not only does it demonstrate that the comment is completley error ridden, but also that it isn't all that original.</p>

<!--more-->

<blockquote><p>HERE'S REAL PROOF THAT EVOLUTION IS WRONG!!!</p></blockquote>

<p><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/index.html">Been there; done that; got the t-shirt; gone back dozens of times; bought a lifetime pass; got married there; had children there; plan to be buried there.</a></p>

<p>The following list contains links to sections of Issak's index, which respond to statements made in the comment.</p>

<ol>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB030.html">CB030: Decay of prebiotic molecules</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB010.html">CB010: Probability of abiogenesis</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB010_2.html">CB010.2: Origin of the first cells</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB621.html">CB621: Mitochondrial Eve</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CC/CC102.html">CC102: Sandal footprint found with trilobites</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CC/CC331.html">CC331: Polystrate fossils and deposition</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CD/CD102_1.html">CD102.1: Lewis Overthrust</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CC/CC335.html">CC335: Vertical whale fossil</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CC/CC052.html">CC052: Laetoli footprints</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CC/CC101.html">CC101: Paluxy river footprints</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CC/CC110.html">CC110: Moab Man</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CF/CF101.html">CF101: Origin of the Universe</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CF/CF001_2.html">CF001.2: Thermodynamics universal</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB040.html">CB040: Left-handed amino acids</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB101.html">CB101: Most mutations harmful?</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB010_1.html">CB010.1: Complex "simple" life</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB015.html">CB015: DNA or protein: which came first?</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB940.html">CB940: Complex structures by chance</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB200.html">CB200: Irreducible complexity</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CF/CF010.html">CF010: Cybernetic simulations show no order from Darwinism</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CF/CF003.html">CF003: Information assembling itself</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB030_1.html">CB030.1: UV effect on early molecules</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CF/CF002_1.html">CF002.1: Tornadoes in a junkyard</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB141.html">CB141: Differing chromosome numbers</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB100.html">CB100: Rare mutations</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB100.html">CB901.1: Variation within kinds</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB200_2.html">CB200.2: Blood clotting and irreducibly complexity</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB300.html">CB300: Evolution of complex organs</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CC/CC352.html">CC352: Archaeoraptor was a fake</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CC/CC130.html">CC130: Petrified hammer?</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB701.html">CB701: Haeckel's embryo pictures</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CC/CC216_2.html">CC216.2: Horse fossil record</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CC/CC001.html">CC001: Piltdown man</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB930_1.html">CB930.1: Coelacanth, a living fossil</a></li>
</ol>

<blockquote><p>Thanks for your time, and explore the REAL truth behind the incorrect philosophical myth of evolution. Take care and God bless you!</p></blockquote>

<p>Irony, thou art a popular muse.</p>
