---
layout: article
title: NSF Center for the Study of Evolution in Action Funded
date: '2010-05-30 17:04:13 -0700'
author: Richard B. Hoppe
mt_id: 4636
blog_id: 2
post_id: 4636
basename: nsf_center_for
---
William Dembski [calls envious attention](http://www.uncommondescent.com/education/beacon-comes-home-with-the-bacon/) to the funding (reportedly $25M) by NSF of the BEACON (Bio/computational Evolution in Action CONsortium ) project, a multi-institutional consortium that is intended

> ...to conduct research on fundamental evolutionary dynamics in both natural and artificial systems, educate a generation of multi-disciplinary scientists in these methods, and improve public understanding of evolution at all levels. The center will unite biologists who study natural evolutionary processes with computer scientists and engineers who are harnessing these processes to solve real-world problems. 

Among the researchers associated with the consortium is Joe Felsenstein, who guest posts here on occasion.  On a fast run-through of [the personnel listing](http://www.beacon.msu.edu/new_people.php) I also see at least four senior people who have been associated with the _AVIDA_ project at Michigan State (Pennock, Lenski, Ofria, and Wilke) and other leaders in both evolutionary biology and computer modeling of evolution.  The consortium includes Michigan State University (lead institution), along with the University of Washington, the University of Texas at Austin, North Carolina A&T, and the University of Idaho.  I'll be interested to see what comes out of it, especially given [its lofty goals](http://www.beacon.msu.edu/summary.html):

> BEACON will have a powerful legacy: we will reframe public perceptions of evolution and increase understanding of scientific methods. At the same time, we will produce a conceptual framework to firmly establish evolutionary biology as an experimental science and cement its links to computing in a crossfertilization that enhances both fields.

See also [here](http://www.beacon.msu.edu/education.html):

> **K-12 and general public education.**
> 
> In this area, BEACON will pursue four main goals:
> 
> 
>   
> \* Demonstrate the fundamental power and importance of evolution. BEACON will contribute to the pressing national need to bolster U.S. pre-eminence in science and technology by educating people about the importance of understanding, managing and harnessing biological and computational evolutionary processes and deconstructing the false dichotomy of micro- versus macro-evolution.  
> \* Disseminating materials generated by BEACON. Our team includes experts in science education and outreach who will work with all BEACON researchers to adapt BEACON research for use in science classes in schools in ways that address national science standards and goals.  
> \* Increasing participation in science and engineering. We will broaden participation in STEM disciplines by introducing teachers and students from underrepresented groups to the new research opportunities afforded by BEACON's applied evolutionary tools and research programs.  
> \* Preparing responsible citizens. We will deepen student's understanding of evolution-related challenges, such as responding to the evolution of infectious diseases and limiting the evolution of antibiotic and pesticide resistance, and have them learn to protect the integrity of the scientific process.

Those are high aspirations.
