---
layout: article
title: Creationist vs. creationist on Homo habilis
date: '2010-05-05 16:56:14 -0700'
author: Nick Matzke
mt_id: 4609
blog_id: 2
post_id: 4609
basename: creationist_vs
---
For many years, Discovery Institute spokesperson Casey Luskin has been telling the world that the genus _Homo_ is preceded by no transitional forms, because the species typically thought to be transitional between australopithecines and _Homo_, _Homo habilis_, is actually an _Australopithechus_ itself.  Poof, there goes the transition.  As I pointed out long ago, this argument about what names to apply to fossils under Linnaean taxonomy is basically pointless -- [the fossils stay transitional in time and in morphology no matter what names you give them](http://pandasthumb.org/archives/2006/09/fun-with-homini-1.html) -- but creationists like Luskin don't care about that (and don't give me that silliness about ID advocates not being creationists, Luskin is arguing for the special creation of humans, for goodness' sake!).\*  Instead, they love to misrepresent the terminological dispute to obscure the [actual big picture of the data](http://pandasthumb.org/archives/2006/09/fun-with-homini-1.html).

Unfortunately for Luskin, though, other creationists play the same game, and, don't you know it, it turns out that the transitional specimens come out as transitional in their latest analysis.  Bryan College creationist Todd Wood is [announcing](http://toddcwood.blogspot.com/) [his "baraminological"\*\* analysis of _Homo habilis_, _Australopithecus sediba_, and other fossils](http://www.answersingenesis.org/articles/arj/v3/n1/hominid-baraminology).  He took a bunch of cladistic datasets from the paleoanthropology literature (all based on crandiodental characters) and put them through his "baraminological distance" algorithm to see where there are clusters and gaps.  He concludes that the recently-discovered _Australopithecus sediba_ should actually be _Homo sediba_, but this is just this is what several paleoanthropologists said after it was published.  More significantly for our interests, instead of saying that _habilis_ is just another ape far removed from _Homo_, Wood concludes that _habilis_ clearly groups _with_ the rest of _Homo_, and that big, unfillable, magical God-obviously-acted-here gap, which all creationists mindlessly, dogmatically believe in come hell or high water, is actually between _habilis_ and the australopiths.  Whoops! 

Here's some quotes:

[Casey Luskin, September 2006](http://www.evolutionnews.org/2006/09/media_goes_gaga_over_baby_aust.html):

> "These rapid, unique, and genetically significant changes are termed "a genetic revolution" where "no australopithecine species is obviously transitional." One commentator proposed this evidence implies a "big bang theory" of human evolution. Now that "_Homo_" _habilis_ is best recognized as an australopithecine due to its ape-like skeletal structure (see "The Human Genus," Science, 284:65-71), it is no wonder an article in _Nature_ last year recognized the lack of a clear-cut immediate ancestor for our genus _Homo_..."

[Casey Luskin, August 2007](http://www.evolutionnews.org/2007/08/paleoanthropologists_disown_ho.html):

> "In other words, _habilis_ can no longer be considered the ancestor to the rest of the genus _Homo_."

[Casey Luskin, March 2010](http://www.evolutionnews.org/2010/03/smithsonians_new_human_origins.html):

> But the exhibit gives no evidence of dissent from the official party line, such as an admission from Ernst Mayr in 2004 that "\[t\]he earliest fossils of _Homo, Homo rudolfensis_ and _Homo erectus_, are separated from Australopithecus \[sic, should be italicized\] by a large, unbridged gap," and therefore we're in a position of "\[n\]ot having any fossils that can serve as missing links."
> 
> I guess according to the Smithsonian's exhibit, this large, unbridged gap is just more evidence for evolution.

But [Todd Wood (2010) says](http://www.answersingenesis.org/articles/arj/v3/n1/hominid-baraminology)...

> Most surprising, three controversial taxa appear to be unequivocally grouped with the homininans: _Homo habilis, Homo rudolfensis_, and _Australopithecus sediba_. As noted above, Hartwig-Scherer (1999) considers _H. habilis_ an australopith, but Lubenow (2004, pp. 299-301) and Line (2005a) believe some _H. habilis_ specimens might be human. Additional creationists who reject the human status of _H. habilis_ include Gish (1995, p. 279), Hummer (1979), Mehlert (1996), Murdock (2006), and Young (2006). Likewise, though Lubenow (2004, pp. 328-329) and Cuozzo (1977) believe _H. rudolfensis_ to be human, Hartwig-Scherer and Brandt (2007) consider it a kind of ape. As of this writing, there has been no creationist commentary or interpretation of _Au. sediba_, but given _sediba_'s extremely ape-like forearms (Berger et al. 2010), it seems likely that many creationists would prefer to place _sediba_ among the australopiths.

So there you have it.  Wood has "saved" the distinctiveness of humans, but only by including _habilis_ and _sediba_, which some paleoanthropologists (and even more creationists) thought were so different from humans that they should be in a whole different genus, and which [had brains much closer to the size of chimp brains](http://pandasthumb.org/archives/2006/09/fun-with-homini-1.html) than to modern human brains.  Wood continues by looking for the silver lining:

> Despite these contradictory opinions, the present results strongly support the classification of all three species in the human holobaramin. All analyses showed all three taxa clearly clustering with other homininans and separately from other australopiths.

Well, except for _Australopithecus africanus_, which just happens to be the australopithecine that is the closest relative of Homo...

> The position of _Au. africanus_ is somewhat less clear. In the BDC analysis of the datasets of Strait and Grine (2001; 2004) and Smith and Grine (2008), _Au. africanus_ was positively correlated with one and four homininans respectively. In both cases, _Au. africanus_ appeared as an outlier from the _Homo_ cluster in 3D MDS. In the case of Strait and Grine's 2001 dataset, the positive correlation between _Au. africanus_ and _H. rudolfensis_ had bootstrap support of only 62%, indicating that the positive correlation was especially sensitive to changes in the character states used to calculate baraminic distances. Likewise, the bootstrap support for the africanus/rudolfensis correlation in Strait and Grine's 2004 dataset was 59%. In the case of Smith and Grine's (2008) dataset, reduction of the number of outgroup taxa eliminated all positive correlation between _Au. africanus_ and homininans. In BDC analysis of the Strait, Grine, and Moniz (1997) and Berger et al. (2010) datasets, no positive or negative correlation was observed between _Au. africanus_ and homininans. Zeitoun's (2000) dataset showed significant, negative BDC between the _Au. africanus_ specimen Sterkfontein 5 and most of the homininan specimens. In summary, the evidence for including _Au. africanus_ within the human holobaramin appears quite weak.

However, Wood neglects to point out that _afarensis_ doesn't form a (phenetic, remember) cluster with the apes or other australopithecines, either.  In some of his MDS (multi-dimensional scaling, a way of representing distances between a bunch of points where each point has measurements in many dimensions) plots, _afarensis_ comes out pretty much exactly between _Homo_ and non-_Homo_.

Wood concludes:

> this present study should end charges against creationists that classification of australopiths or "early Homo" as human or ape is arbitrary and meaningless (for example, Conrad 1986-1987; Kitcher 1983, p. 154; Miller 2008, p. 93; Nickels 1986-1987). Rather than looking at a handful of traits or casually declaring australopiths to be apes, the present study has supported the separate classification of humans (genus _Homo_ sensu lato) and as many as three groups containing australopith taxa, based on a suite of characters selected from conventional paleoanthropology studies.

Unfortunately, it still remains the case that creationist classifications of hominins are arbitrary and meaningless.  The first principle of baraminology is that the Bible is always right, and if the rest of the data contradicts the Bible, then so much the worse for the data.  So Wood, whatever spark he may sometimes show amongst the pitiful intellectual trainwreck that is creationism, has already committed intellectual suicide on this issue and guaranteed that the data could never change his mind on the key question he is allegedly assessing, the special creation of humans.  Even if he did decide to give the data the final word, his analysis consists of drawing circles around phenetic clusters, with no principles about how to decide when things are in the same cluster or not (such methods do commonly exist in statistics, but they would create the danger of getting an answer one doesn't like).  

And finally, it's pretty clear that people like Luskin and the Discovery Institute aren't going to change their mind on this one.  Unless you are prepared to take the Todd Wood/Kurt Wise position and simply assert that the literal interpretation of the Bible comes first and the data fundamentally don't matter, if you're a creationist and you admit that _Homo habilis_ shares common ancestry with _Homo sapiens_, it's all over but the whining.

\* Actually understanding these naming and classification issues in paleoanthropology involves delving into the history of systematics and cladistics in evolutionary biology generally and in paleoanthropology specifically.  Each time Luskin quotes someone, you have to ask if the writer in question is a fan of Mayrian "evolutionary systematics", where you lump specimens into species and genera based on overall similiarity and some kind of gestalt sense of what a "genus" is.  Or are they adhering to cladistic principles of "phylogenetic systematics", where only shared derived characters are considered informative?  Does the writer think taxa should be monophyletic, or is polyphyly ok?  Are they defending some taxonomic scheme for reasons of convenience, or as an approximate description of the morphology, or to buttress some hypothesized set of ancestor-descendent relationships, or to propose an explicit, cladistically testable phylogeny?  Is the writer Ernst Mayr, arch-defender of "evolutionary systematics", writing at the age of 99 on a topic well outside his speciality? \[also, [Mayr says in a footnote](http://books.google.com/books?id=iCmAIzmlhiUC&amp;lpg=PA198&amp;ots=W81uU7rDMQ&amp;dq=Mayr%2C%20%22by%20a%20large%2C%20unbridged%20gap%22&amp;pg=PA198#v=onepage&amp;q&amp;f=false) that Luskin leaves out of his quote, "I follow those who place _Homo habilis_ in the genus _Australopithecus_"\]  Or is the writer some marginally-informed journalist who couldn't tell you the difference between "evolutionary systematics" and "phylogenetic systematics", the difference between Linnaean taxonomy and rank-free taxonomy, the difference between characters that are shared with outgroups (and thus don't give any grouping information about the ingroup) and characters that are only shared by a subset of taxa in the ingroup (and thus give grouping information), or the difference between classifications that allow polyphyly and those that don't, and therefore sprinkles their article with vague comments about "big differences" and "small differences" and "ancestral"/"not ancestral", without any sense of the (very narrow!) scale of the actual differences between these positions when applied to a bunch of closely-related hominin fossils?

\*\* "Barminology" is the creationist study of "bara mins" ("created kinds" in Hebrew).  The key metric, "baraminic distance" basically seems to be a phenetic clustering method, where groupings are done by eye and outgroups are excluded if they make the ingroups seem too similar.
